What to Do if Your Baby Is Waking Up in the Middle of the Night
author-image
by 
Amy O’Connor
Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P. on September 9, 2020
iStock
baby night wakings, crying baby up at night
Whether she's teething, practicing a new skill or just having fun, no one gets much sleep when your little one suddenly wants attention in the middle of the night. Here's why it's happening and what to do about it.

IN THIS ARTICLE
Why does my baby wake up crying overnight? 
What do I do if my baby wakes up in the middle of the night? 
How can I prevent night wakings? 
Does it sometimes seem like your baby is having all-night parties and didn't invite you? If your baby has suddenly started waking up overnight after weeks or months of sleeping through, welcome to your new normal.

While adults make a distinction between day and evening activities, to little ones, it’s all kind of a blur. During your baby’s first few months, no one in your family is likely to be getting much sleep, especially at night. Newborns have tiny tummies and need to eat every two to four hours, so unless you have someone else on feeding duty, you’re up, too.

Later, frequent night wakings can be caused by anything from a growth spurt or teething pain to memories of an especially fun day. Simply put, night wakings are part of life with a baby and nothing to worry about, though there’s plenty you can do to keep them brief and less frequent.

Why does my baby wake up crying overnight?
It’s one thing when your baby wakes up in the middle of the night gurgling, cooing and playing with her toes. It’s another when she seems to be in distress. While not all cries are signs of discomfort, your baby could be dealing with temporary sleep disruptors like illness, teething, separation anxiety or other age-appropriate fears.

Newborns cry often. Most sobbing sessions are unrelated to urgent needs, and may even help baby calm down and get to sleep. If your older baby cries overnight after a stretch of sleeping through the night without fussing, learning to decode the hidden messages in those sounds will help you decide what to do. 

Here's why an older baby might be waking up overnight:

Teething. Teething often leads to night waking, but the waking is usually only triggered by the pain of teething the first couple of nights. Teething pain can occur anytime your baby breaks new teeth — from as early as 3 months to up to a year or older —and while most babies cope with the discomfort well, some are so bothered by teething that it interrupts their sleep. If this is happening with your baby, confirm your suspicions with your pediatrician, and ask about when to offer pain relievers like infant acetaminophen.
Schedule changes or lack of consistent sleep schedule or bedtime routine. While you don’t have to have every minute accounted for, babies do best with a consistent schedule. Having a regular routine and sleeping enough overnight and for naps can help your baby stay alert for the things that require attention, such as a visit from Grandma and Grandpa, and be ready to fall and stay asleep at night. Major changes to the normal schedule makes baby overtired, and can lead to night wakings or trouble falling asleep.
Practicing a new skill or approaching a big milestone. Being a baby is all about learning new tricks. During the first year, she’ll learn to roll over, sit up, clap, wave, kick, cruise around like a little turtle and eventually, pull up to a standing position and toddle across the room. What do these milestones have to do with sleep? Everything. Your baby isn’t just learning new skills, she’s also eager to practice them, even during the middle of the night. She’s also being stimulated and storing loads of new information. All that brain overload is a good thing, but it makes it hard to settle down and may cause night wakings.
Separation anxiety. Somewhere around 8 months, you may notice your little one seems extra clingy. She may not want to go to the sitter, or might howl when you leave the room, even for a minute. This baby separation anxiety stage can also cause sleep disruptions when she wakes up overnight and notices you’re not there. While there’s not much you can do to keep your baby from waking up in the middle of the night, you might try a version of sleep training to calm her down and help her self-soothe so that she can get back to sleep on her own, unassisted by you. 
Sleep regression. Many babies go through a sleep regression when they're 4 months old but there can also be a 6-month sleep regression, an 8-month sleep regression and even a 12-month sleep regression. If your older baby is waking up overnight again all of a sudden and it turns out to be a sleep regression, you may need to try sleep training (or try it again) to get her back on track. 
Craving a nighttime feed. Be selective about when and how often you feed your cranky little one back to sleep. If she's still younger and at the stage where she needs nighttime feedings, then an overnight snack may be just the thing to settle her down. But for many older babies who no longer need nighttime feedings, it’s a reward you don't want to get into the habit of offering because it can lead to more frequent night wakings. The exception may be if your baby is going through a growth spurt. Ask your pediatrician how to handle those so that she's getting enough to eat during the day. If your baby is just gurgling and cooing at night, don’t rush in. She doesn’t necessarily need a snack, and if you leave her alone for a bit she’ll probably fall back asleep on her own. Note: This watch-and-wait approach doesn’t apply to newborns, who need to eat more frequently. Breastfed babies should nurse every two to three hours, and bottle-fed babies every three to four hours, so don't expect them to sleep for long no matter what time it is.
Ear infection. The pain of ear infections or earaches (caused by wax or other factors) can wake baby in the night. The reason: Lying down changes pressure in the ear, causing pain to become worse at night or during naps. While you’re managing the infection or ear pain with medication prescribed by the doctor, ask your pediatrician whether there's a safe way to elevate your baby's head while she's sleeping and for other forms of pain relief.
What do I do if my baby wakes up in the middle of the night?
While what to do will depend on what’s causing the night waking, there are definitely do's and don’ts for soothing a baby back to sleep.