5 reasons why braiding your hair is a blessing in disguise
Updated on:7 January 2020, 11:07am IST
Get set to tie up your precious mane into pretty braids.
Sonakshi Kohli 53 Likes 
hair braidingKeep frizziness and hair damage at bay with braids. GIF courtesy: GIPHY
Once upon a time, mommy didn’t let you out of sight without tying your hair in neat, stylish braids. We say, the time to do so has come again now.

Not just because it looks fashionable, but also because braiding can be a blessing in disguise for your hair health.

Don’t believe us? Well, take a look at the reasons explained by Dr Apoorva Shah, trichologist and founder of RichFeel Hair Clinic, Mumbai and you will definitely get convinced to braid up your precious mane.

1. It can avoid hair breakage
“Braiding the hair is a good, protective practice that can save your hair from any breakage as it strengthens the hair structurally. In fact, a loosely-tied braid can work alongside your body’s natural process to boost hair growth,” Shah explains.

You may also like
Stop believing these 3 hair oiling myths for stronger and healthier tresses
HAIR CAREStop believing these 3 hair oiling myths for stronger and healthier tressesGrace Bains
Want to manage hair loss? An expert points out things you may be doing wrong
HAIR CAREWant to manage hair loss? An expert points out things you may be doing wrongDr Jaspreet Rajani
Has colour damaged your hair? Try this avocado and egg hair mask
HAIR CAREHas colour damaged your hair? Try this avocado and egg hair maskGrace BainsBraids can be your best friend in saving those precious manes. Image courtesy: Shutterstock
2. It takes care of your hair even while you’re asleep
As per Shah, braiding your hair before going to bed can have great results because of the lesser friction produced between the tied hair and the pillow cover.

3. It can keep your hair nourished
“Braiding helps to lock the moisture into the hair, keeping them moisturised and nourished,” Shah points out.

“You can even oil the hair with Brahmi Jaborandi hair oil before braiding the hair for deeper nourishment,” he adds.

4. It can prevent frizziness
You know how frizzy, out-of-whack hair are just about enough to spoil your look and well, your mood right? Well, braiding can spare you the horror.

According to Shah, the added nourishment and moisture-locking ability of braiding is something that can even keep hair frizziness and dryness at bay.

Also read: 4 easy-peasy hair hacks that will help you tame that frizz

5. It can keep split-ends away
Braiding your hair before stepping out can protect it against damage from the sun and well—pollution.

“With lesser exposure to these stress-causing elements, you hair tends to stay protected against the resulting split-ends and dryness,” Shah says.

Find the solution for hair damage caused by pollution hereSay bye-bye to those ugly split ends! Image courtesy: Shutterstock
But keep this in mind…
While braiding can be a great protective measure for your hair, Shah recommends not keeping your hair tied into them for more than 7-8 hours a day. Additionally, he warns against tying the hair into tight braids as doing so can put strain on the hair follicle and lead to hair loss.

Though braiding is good for the hair, avoid any tight braiding styles as it strains the hair roots. Making tiny braids can lead to itching of hair and will cause damage to the hair shaft.

The best way is to keep changing the hairstyles. Hence, it is important to tie the braids comfortably and ensure that there is no specific strain on the hair roots.

Along with braiding it’s also important to nourish the hair and follow a hair care regimen regularly under the guidance of a trichologist to promote hair growth.