Bungee jumping
Origem: Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre.

Esta página cita fontes, mas estas não cobrem todo o conteúdo. Ajude a inserir referências. Conteúdo não verificável poderá ser removido.—Encontre fontes: Google (notícias, livros e acadêmico) (Março de 2018)

Bungee jumping da Ponte de Victoria Falls em Zâmbia/Zimbabwe
Bungee jumping (pronúncia em inglês: [ˈbʌndʒiː ˈdʒʌmpɪŋ]) é um esporte radical praticado por muitos aventureiros corajosos, que consiste em saltar de uma altura num vazio amarrado aos tornozelos ou cintura a uma corda elástica.[1] Este esporte é derivado do Naghol, que é uma espécie de prova Iniciação pela qual os rapazes de uma aldeia ao sul da Ilha de Pentecostes, em Vanuatu, têm de passar para poderem começar a ser chamados de adultos.

História
A ideia do Bungee Jumping surgiu de um ritual milenar chamado Naghol, até hoje praticado pelos nativos da Ilha de Pentecostes, em Vanuatu, como uma espécie de prova de iniciação. Para comemorar a colheita do inhame, eles se atiram de uma torre de 30 metros de altura, amarrados pelo tornozelo por um tipo de cipó.

Em 1954, dois jornalistas da revista National Geographic foram a esta ilha e viram homens a saltar de uma torre com videiras amarradas aos tornozelos. A técnica já era tão avançada que as videiras tinham as medidas exatas para que quem saltasse não encostasse no chão, mantendo a distância suficiente para não partir o pescoço.

Em 1987, o neozelandês Alan John Hackett saltou da torre Eiffel, em Paris, uma coisa impensável na altura e que deixou o mundo de olhos postos naqueles "malucos" que se atiram de alturas impressionantes presos apenas pelo tornozelo.

A partir daí, o bungee jumping passou a ser considerado um esporte radical e tem já milhares de adeptos por todo o mundo.

Recorde
O Guinness só registra saltos de plataformas fixas para garantir a precisão das medidas. John Kockleman, no entanto, entrou para o livro após um salto de 2200 pés de um balão na Califórnia, em 1989. Em 1991, Andrew Salisbury saltou 9000 pés de um helicóptero em Cancún para um programa de televisão, patrocinado pela Reebok. A corda atingiu uma tensão máxima de 3157 pés. Ele pousou a salvo de paraquedas após o salto.

We compiled together a comprehensive guide that includes all the necessary information you will need to do bungee jumping. You can find below useful explanations on how to do bungee jumping. Moreover, the most popular locations for bungee jumping are waiting for you to discover.

What is Bungee Jumping?
what is bungee jumping

Bungee jumping is an action-filled recreational activity that involves head-first jumping from a tall structure with an elastic cord attached into participants' feet. That tall structure can be a building, crane, bridge or even a helicopter. The first modern bungee jump was in 1979 and since then the sport became widely popular. Bungee jumping is one of the most enjoyed extreme sports and available in almost every destination in the world.  

How to do Bungee Jumping?
bungee jumping

Bungee jumping is for everyone aged over sixteen and does not require prior experience. You don’t buy any equipment; you are just there to enjoy it. The most crucial part of bungee jumping is being able to gather enough courage to do it.  Also, there are precautions to take for security purposes. Bungee jumping may have health risks for people who are overweight or with injuries. Pregnant women, people with heart problems and high blood pressure are not advised to do bungee jumping. If you are in doubt, make sure to consult to your doctor before deciding. 

Bungee Jumping Equipment List: What Equipment is Needed for Bungee Jumping?
bungee jumping equipment list

Bungee Cord
Bungee cord is the most important piece of equipment you will be using in your bungee jumping experience and will be attached to your ankle with a harness. A bungee cord is mostly made of multiple strands of rubber and natural latex. Bungee cords are discarded after 500 to 1000 jumps to ensure safety.

Harness
Two harnesses will be attached to your body during your bungee jump, one to your ankle and another one to your body to increase safety.   

Rubber Cord
Some bungee jumping facilities add another safety feature such as the extra  rubber cord to maximize safety. If you are planning to travel with your equipment, there might be additional costs. You can click here to check the extra services price table. 

Useful Tips for Bungee Jumping
There is not a strict clothing directive in bungee jumping, anything you are comfortable in works. It is not recommended for women to wear a dress or high heels though. 
If you are scared of the height you are in, it is totally normal to decide not to jump beforehand but it is crucial to make that decision before jumping, not in the last step.
You should carefully listen and trust the jump instructors since they go through in-depth international training to become a qualified instructor. 
Try not to eat much before your jump; it is even better to jump with an empty stomach. 
Avoid carrying valuable items with you since they can fall and distract you from the experience.  
When is the Best Time for Bungee Jumping?
when is the best time for bungee jumping

Although bungee jumping can be enjoyed in every time of the year, it is good to know that some weather conditions such as fog or snow can hugely impact your overall experience. Therefore summer season can be considered as the best time for bungee jumping since the weather is usually warm and dry. 

Best Spots for Bungee Jumping in Turkey
İstanbul 
İstanbul is the most populous and most influential city of Turkey with many historical and cultural attractions. Modern İstanbul is also a place to find almost every recreational outdoor activity and bungee jumping is not an exception. Kilyos district is the most popular bungee jumping spot in the city. Book your flight ticket to İstanbul to enjoy bungee jumping in addition to its unique landmarks.

İzmir 
İzmir is one of the largest and most influential cities of western Turkey. Most bungee jumping facilities in İzmir are located around the Çeşme district. Your flight ticket to İzmir will be the first step for your thrilling jump.

Antalya 
Antalya is located in the southern part of Turkey and is one of the most popular tourism destinations in the country. Although Antalya is mostly known for its amazing beaches and natural beauties, the city is also a significant center for recreational outdoor activities and extreme sports. Lara district in Antalya has bungee jumping facilities with spectacular scenery. Book your flight ticket to Antalya to enjoy the city and its thrilling recreational activities like bungee jumping.

Fethiye / Muğla
Fethiye is one of the most popular summer destinations of Turkey. There are many bungee jumping facilities pop up during summer season in Fethiye. Book your flight ticket to Muğla to enjoy its gorgeous beaches and recreational activities like bungee jumping.

Ölüdeniz / Muğla
Bungee jumping in Ölüdeniz is an adrenaline-rushing experience with a free fall from 53 meters. Book your flight ticket to Muğla to enjoy Ölüdeniz to the fullest with its sandy beaches, natural beauties and risky adventures.

Best Spots for Bungee Jumping in the World
London
Seeing London from above is a great experience on its own but seeing it while free-falling from 50 meters is something else. “The Doom Bungee Jump” is an incredible way to get your heart pumping in London. Don’t be afraid to say yes to this thrilling experience and book your flight ticket to London.

Amsterdam
Bungee jumping in is a thrilling must-go experience in Amsterdam since you are able to see the whole city and its surroundings. “Bungee Amsterdam” is located walking distance away from the city center. Book your flight ticket to Amsterdam to enjoy what the city has to offer.

Barcelona
Barcelona has many amazing facilities for bungee jumping and some of them are longer than 70 meters. Book your flight ticket to Barcelona to enjoy the city and its adrenaline-rushing outdoor activities.

Lloret de Mar is a famous spot for bungee jumping on the coastal line. It is only an hour away from Barcelona. As an alternative experience, you can consider bridge jumping in Sant Sadurní d’Anoia.  

Belgrade
Belgrade is historically divided into two parts, one is called the Old Town and other part called New Belgrade. “Bungee Jump” in Ada Ciganlija is located in the middle of the two; it’s worth to book your flight ticket to Belgrade just to admire the view. 

Prague
Prague is known for its spectacular architecture, historical landmarks, and cultural heritage but its recreational activities never come to mind. There are many amazing bungee jumping spots one hour drive away from Prague city center that you can enjoy. Book your flight ticket to Prague to try them out.

Zvikov Bridge, Harrachov TV Tower and Chomutov Bridge are particularly famous spots for bungee jumping in Czech Republic.  

If you are planning to travel with your equipment, there might be additional costs. You can click here to check the extra services price table.

