How to Celebrate
Download Article
METHODS
1Recognizing Company Milestones and Success
2Celebrating Birthdays and Life Events
3Commemorating Holidays
OTHER SECTIONS
Related Articles
References
Article Summary
Co-authored by wikiHow Staff
Last Updated: November 17, 2020 References

Celebrations are opportunities to put the spotlight on someone or something important. Birthdays and other major milestones, like graduations, are great times to celebrate someone close you. You can also celebrate religious holidays, your community, your country, or company successes. Parties, gifts, dinners, festivals, decorations, and special gatherings are just a few ways you can celebrate and show appreciation.

Method
1
Recognizing Company Milestones and SuccessDownload Article
Image titled Celebrate Step 1
1
Offer praise and recognition to stellar employees. You can celebrate your employees by offering written or verbal praise, or by creating a program or award that routinely recognizes their hard work. Even something small, like a sincere email that demonstrates your appreciation, can go a long way.[1]
For example, you could start an Employee of the Month program or gather your team members together to praise an employee.
You might tell an employee, "Thank you so much for your hard work on the last project, Jillian. Your efforts really wowed the customer and we couldn't have pulled it off without you."
Gather your team together and say, "Everyone has been working so hard and that has not gone unnoticed by upper management. You help us realize our company's vision every day. We sincerely appreciate all of you."
Image titled Celebrate Step 2
2
Organize a party to celebrate a company milestone or success. This could be as small as a celebratory lunch, or you could go way bigger, like hosting an event with live music and activities. It all depends on what’s being celebrated and what your budget allows. Celebrations can help your employees feel appreciated and motivate them to keep up the good work.[2]
For example, you might say, "Our company has doubled in size this year, and it's your hard work and innovative strategies that helped to make it happen. To show our appreciation, we'd like to invite all employees to a celebratory luncheon on May 27th."
Image titled Celebrate Step 3
3
Give your employees a bonus or day off after a big achievement. Monetary gifts or a few paid days off can show your employees just how much you appreciate them. If your employees have helped the company achieve a major success, consider giving them a bonus or time away from the office as a way to celebrate their hard work.[3]
You could say to your team, "Because of your hard work over the past 6 months, we've just landed the most important and lucrative deal in company history. Take the rest of the week off to rest up and celebrate! To show our appreciation, you can also expect a bonus on your next paycheck."
Method
2
Celebrating Birthdays and Life EventsDownload Article
Image titled Celebrate Step 4
1
Put the spotlight on the person(s) being celebrated. No matter what the occasion, keep in mind that you’re celebrating a specific person or people. It’s their day, and all of the attention should be on them! It’s easy to get caught up in party planning and gift giving, but at the end of the day, what matters most are the people involved.
Try not to stress out about making a celebration perfect. Instead, focus on making sure everyone enjoys themselves!
Image titled Celebrate Step 5
2
Throw a party or go out on the town to celebrate a birthday. There are so many ways to celebrate someone’s life and show them how much you care. It’s usually a good idea to ask the person how they want to spend their birthday and offer to cover costs. Let them know that you’re down for anything—it’s their day! If they want to stay at home and keep it lowkey, that’s fine, too.[4]
Throw a surprise birthday party or a dance party.
Go out to dinner or enjoy a night on the town.
Buy or make thoughtful gifts.
Treat yourself to a spa day if it’s your own birthday.
Image titled Celebrate Step 6
3
Gather the family for milestones like graduations. Celebrating a major accomplishment, like graduation, usually involves a large or small family gathering. The idea is to show the person how proud you are of them, and you can do that in many different ways. If it’s your celebration, be proud of your hard work and savor every moment—you earned it![5]
Have a celebratory dinner at home or at a restaurant.
Take plenty of photos to remember the event.
Host a party and/or give gifts.
Image titled Celebrate Step 7
4
Toast the bride and groom at a wedding reception. The reception is a party that happens after the wedding ceremony itself, and it allows family and friends a chance to celebrate the new union. Toast the couple by raising a glass and saying something meaningful that comes straight from your heart. If you know you’ll be toasting at a reception, you may want to plan your words ahead of time rather than just winging it![6]
Toasts usually happen right before or after cutting the wedding cake.
Informal receptions may not include toasts, but you can still tell the couple how happy you are for them.
Image titled Celebrate Step 8
5
Celebrate your kin at a family reunion. Reunions are opportunities to honor the entire family and its history. It’s a wonderful chance to take photos, meet family members that live far away, and simply gather in one place to celebrate and be together.[7]
Reunions typically serve plenty of food and hold activities for family members of all ages.
Commemorate relatives who’ve passed away by hanging up photos and trading stories about them.
Image titled Celebrate Step 9
6
Honor the life of someone who’s passed away at a wake. It’s hard when someone special passes away, and most people aren’t in the mood to have a party after the funeral. Keep in mind that a wake isn’t about celebrating the person’s death—it’s about celebrating their life. Friends and family gather together for strength, to pay their respects, to swap stories about the deceased, and to honor the life they led.[8]
Some people find wakes to be very healing, but others feel that they’re inappropriate. It’s up to you and your family to decide whether or not to hold a wake.
Method
3
Commemorating HolidaysDownload Article
Image titled Celebrate Step 10
1
Gather your family members together for religious holidays. Religious holidays vary greatly, but almost all of them involve family gatherings. The way you celebrate is up to your family, but look at holidays as opportunities to create family traditions. There may be feasts, gift giving, prayer, gatherings at places of worship, festivals, or rituals, depending on what the holiday is about.
Examples of religious holidays that families celebrate together are Christmas, Easter, Hanukkah, Eid Al-Adha, Diwali, and many more.[9]
Use themed décor to create a joyous or seasonal atmosphere.
Be inclusive if you’re celebrating in the classroom.
Image titled Celebrate Step 11
2
Attend local festivals and parades to support your community. Community celebrations are all about locals gathering together to have a good time and tend to foster a feeling of togetherness. These celebrations might be cultural, religious, artistic, or seasonal in nature.
To celebrate in a communal way, attend a local parade, check out the community fair, or invite your closest neighbors over for a cookout.
Image titled Celebrate Step 12
3
Honor veterans, leaders, or your country at national celebrations. National celebrations commemorate a country or nation’s freedom and honor those who’ve devoted their lives in service of it. You can celebrate by attending community events, visiting memorials, or promoting awareness. Use these events as opportunities to think about where you live and the people who’ve helped make it strong. For example, you might:[10]
Hang up your national flag.
Organize a moment of silence at work or school for Veteran’s Day.
Set off fireworks or have a cookout to celebrate July 4th.
Image titled Celebrate Step 13
4
Celebrate minority groups to show solidarity and strength. Many minority groups have faced prejudice, oppression, and hardship, both in the past and in the present. You can celebrate and support these groups by promoting acceptance, unity, and social progression. Check out parades, group gatherings, and educational opportunities to honor minority groups. You could also:[11]
Support Pride month and the LGBTQ community by attending a parade, hanging rainbow flags, or making a donation to the LGBTQ Task Force.
Organize a gathering or educational opportunity for Black History Month.