HOW TO CLEAN A TOILET
Clean your toilet so it’s fit for royalty. They do call it a “porcelain throne,” after all! Follow these five steps for cleaning dirty toilet bowls to remove toilet rings, stains and funky smells – quickly and efficiently!

Begin by applying toilet cleaner to the bowl, and allow it to soak. If you’re using vinegar in place of toilet cleaner, simply pour a cup into the bowl. Quickly swish the cleaner around the bowl with a brush.
While the cleaner soaks in, spray the exterior of the toilet with an all-purpose disinfectant. If the toilet is extra dirty, give it a preliminary wipe-down with paper towels and toss them in the trash.
Next, use a scrub sponge to clean the exterior of the toilet. Pay attention the base and floor around the toilet while you’re there. If you have a modern toilet with a quick-disconnect toilet seat, remove the seat and clean it separately.
Once the exterior is clean, use a toilet brush to clean the bowl. If you have hard water rings or stains, use a pumice stone to remove these.
You know the area underneath the rim where water pours out? Since this is out of sight, many people don’t scrub it. Don’t ignore this area! Use your brush or sponge to clean the underside of the rim.
Best Way to Clean a Toilet
We get it. It’s a toilet. Not many people enjoy cleaning toilets. But like most household care, cleaning your toilet regularly will make the process even easier next time. Regular toilet cleaning also eliminates harmful bacteria and ugly mineral or soil buildup. With more than 30 years of toilet scrubbing experience, Molly Maid pros have found that the best way to clean a toilet is fast and efficiently. To do that, always have the right supplies on hand.

Toilet Cleaning Supplies
Keep these supplies in a tote or bucket to separate them from the rest of your cleaning supplies. It’s not a good idea to clean the sink with the toilet sponge or wash dishes with the same rubber gloves.

Waterproof rubber gloves
Scrub sponge
Toilet cleaner or vinegar
Toilet brush
All-purpose disinfectant spray
Cloth or towel
Pumice stone
Paper towels
Cleaning Your Toilet Water Tank
Don’t forget about the water tank! Remove the lid and take a peek inside. If you see any mineral buildup or crud, pour four cups of vinegar into the tank. Allow this to soak for up to an hour. Next, turn the water off to your toilet and flush the toilet. This will drain the tank. Use a sponge or toilet brush to scrub the tank walls while the tank is empty. Turn the water back on, allow the tank to fill, and flush the toilet several times to rinse out the tank.

Don’t Stop There!
Once you’re finished, head back to the Bathroom Cleaning page to learn how to clean your showerhead, bathtub and more. If you would rather spend your precious free time outside of the bathroom, we understand.

