How To Cook Golden, Juicy Chicken Breast on the Stove
by
MEGHAN SPLAWN
updated DEC 20, 2019
https://www.thekitchn.com/how-to-cook-golden-juicy-chicken-breast-on-the-stove-248171
SAVE TO RECIPE BOX
COMMENTS
JUMP TO RECIPE
PRINT
 RECIPE
We independently select these products—if you buy from one of our links, we may earn a commission.
Post Image
(Image credit: Joe Lingeman)
There are as many variations on cooking chicken breast as there are cooks, and I’d say that is a very good thing, as it ensures we never grow tired of this dinner staple.

Pan-seared chicken breast, cooked in a little oil with salt and pepper and finished with a generous knob of butter, is the first way I learned to cook chicken and a technique I always go back to. The resulting chicken has a golden-crisp exterior with a still-juicy interior, and is just as welcome served with steamed vegetables as it is atop creamy Alfredo pasta.

WATCH
How to Cook Chicken Breasts on the Stove
Making Juicy Golden Chicken Breast on the Stove
Kitchn has many tried-and-true techniques for chicken on the stovetop. Some are sautéed, while our most popular version is pan-steamed. This technique takes what we know and love from these other techniques to make a chicken breast with a golden, pan-seared exterior and a juicy interior.

Post Image
(Image credit: Joe Lingeman)
For Your Information
This technique is best for a 10-inch or larger skillet, preferably straight-sided and not nonstick. Cast iron is a great option if you’ve got it.
You’ll need two boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about one pound total), salt, pepper, oil, and butter for this recipe.
Post Image
(Image credit: Joe Lingeman)
Key Steps for Golden, Juicy Chicken Breast
Start with a wide, deep pan and add oil. We’re going to cook the chicken over medium-high heat, and we want to have plenty of room for the two breasts. Using something wide and deep that accommodates the chicken and keeps splatter to a minimum.
Don’t move the chicken for a full five minutes once in the pan. Once the chicken is in the pan, don’t poke, prod, wiggle, or try to flip the chicken for a full five minutes. If you can’t easily flip the chicken with tongs, it’s not ready for flipping yet — and it won’t be golden-brown.
Flip it once and don’t touch again. Flip the breast one time only, with the goal of golden-brown color on each side.
Finish with butter. The butter, which would have burned if added in the beginning, will add flavor and some color at the end of cooking.
Product Image: Kikkerland KT051-G Magnetic Kitchen Timer, Green: Kitchen & Dining
Kikkerland KT051-G Magnetic Kitchen Timer, Green: Kitchen & Dining
$15
AMAZON
BUY NOW
Post Image
(Image credit: Joe Lingeman)
Serving Your Golden Chicken
My favorite use for this golden, juicy chicken is topping creamy chicken Alfredo (the contrast of the chicken with the creamy sauce is heavenly), but this basic technique can be used to start off any number of meals like chopped chicken salads, chicken wraps, and even chicken sandwiches.

Gallery Image
1 / 6