How to Cut a Watermelon
ERIN CLARKE

LEAVE A REVIEWSAVE TO FAVORITESJUMP TO RECIPEJUMP TO VIDEO
It’s a summer life skill day! This post is going to show you the easiest, best method for how to cut a watermelon into cubes of any size.

Cubes of watermelon
Eating cold watermelon right out of the refrigerator is one of summer’s greatest joys.

Yet, despite my love of this naturally hydrating, ultra-refreshing fruit, I very rarely buy and cut up a watermelon. Why? Because it’s a pain. Or so I thought.

Thanks to this easy method for cutting watermelon, however, that all changed.

As it turns out, I’ve been cutting watermelon wrong all along.

Now that I can cut a watermelon properly, we have it in our fridge almost every day, and I am a happy summer gal.

I owe the revelation of the best way to cut a watermelon to my sister. Her 2- and 4-year-old daughters are absolutely hooked on it (smart little ladies they are), so she set out to speed up the cutting process for everyone’s sake, especially her own as Head Watermelon Cutting Officer.

Below, you’ll find a tutorial for how to cut a watermelon step-by-step. I’ve included both photos and a video.

This is without a doubt the easiest way to cut a watermelon you’ll find!

Cubes of watermelon in a container
Once I’ve cut the watermelon into pieces, I like to divide my bounty into two.

Half I keep in the refrigerator for straight up snacking. Cool, fresh watermelon never ever fails to hit the spot.
The other half I freeze in a ziptop bag for making a creamy Watermelon Smoothie. See below for watermelon freezing tips.
Other watermelon cube possibilities: you can use them to create a great big fruit salad, or go a little sweet and savory with this Watermelon Feta Salad with Mint Avocado and Lime.

In addition to going over how to cut a watermelon properly, this post also includes helpful tips for how to pick a watermelon, how to know if a watermelon is ripe, the best way to store it, and more.

Picking the Perfect Watermelon
One of the keys to delicious watermelon is picking the right one. Here are a few tips for how to select the perfect watermelon:

Look for a watermelon that is matte, not shiny, as shiny watermelons are often overgrown.
Select one without any visible bumps or holes, as this can signal issues with watering or bugs.
A heavy watermelon is a juicy watermelon. Pick up a few to see which one feels the heaviest for its size.
Watermelon cubes in a bowl
How to Tell When Watermelon is Ripe
These tips will help you select a watermelon that is perfectly ripe and juicy.

A ripe watermelon should make a hollow sound when you tap or knock on its rind.
The rind should not scratch easily or give way under light pressure.
The bottom of the watermelon has what is called a “field spot.” When a watermelon is ripe, this spot should be yellow.
How to Cut a Watermelon
This is the absolute best way to cut a watermelon into pieces. You can also use it to make watermelon cubes of any size, as well as to cut watermelon sticks.

Rinse and dry the whole watermelon.
A fresh watermelon cut in half
Slice it in half crosswise (you’ll end up with two circular, versus oblong pieces).
Cut off the stem end.
Place the watermelon cut side down on a cutting board.
A watermelon being sliced with a knife
Holding your knife at an angle, cut down towards the cutting board to remove the rind and white flesh. You should see the dark pink insides of the watermelon (pictured above) after you’ve made the cuts.
Continue cutting until all the rind has been removed.
A watermelon with the rind removed and cut into thirds
Cut the watermelon into thirds, making 3 full circle pieces.
Watermelon being cut with a knife
Slice the circles into sticks.
A watermelon being cut into cubes
Slice the sticks into cubes.
Repeat with the other circular pieces, then with the other watermelon half.
Chill the cubes in the refrigerator (if desired). ENJOY!
TIP!
If you are looking for more cool ways to cut a watermelon, in step 7 (when the watermelon is in thirds), instead of slicing the melon into cubes or sticks, stamp out shapes with a cookie cutter. Stars would be festive for the Fourth of July or Labor Day, or try hearts for a special celebration.

Watermelon Storage Tips
To Store a Whole Watermelon. Store a whole watermelon at room temperature for up to 2 weeks.
To Store Watermelon Cubes. Refrigerate watermelon cubes in an airtight storage container for up to 4 days.
To Freeze Watermelon Pieces
To Freeze. Lay the watermelon pieces in a single layer on a parchment or wax paper-lined baking sheet, and freeze until solid. Once frozen, transfer the pieces to an airtight freezer-safe storage container or ziptop bag and freeze for up to 3 months.
Cubes of watermelon on a paper towel
Cutting Watermelon for a Party
This method also works well if you are looking for how to cut watermelon for a party. Set out a bowl of watermelon cubes, then watch everyone’s eyes light up.

If you will be serving this watermelon at a party, I recommend allowing at least 4 hours for it to chill in the fridge (8 hours is even better) to make sure the pieces are icy cold and as refreshing as possible.

Recommended Tools to Cut Watermelon
Sharp Chef’s Knife. A sharp knife is important when cutting a watermelon, and this one is perfect.
Extra Large Cutting Board. When cutting something as large as a watermelon, the extra space is wonderful.
Storage Containers. An easy way to portion and store your watermelon pieces.
Thank you to my sister for this game-changing watermelon cutting hack. I hope this easy way to cut watermelon leads to more melon munching, and thus more summer joy for you the way it has for me.

Cubes of watermelon on a paper towel
REVIEW
SAVE
PRINT
How to Cut a Watermelon
5 from 4 votes
The BEST way to cut a watermelon. Step by step video and photos. Use this easy watermelon hack to make cubes, sticks or pieces. Great for a party!
PREP:
10 mins
COOK:
0 mins
TOTAL:
10 mins
SERVINGS: 1 cup per pound of melon
Ingredients
  
1x
2x
3x
1 watermelon
cutting board and knife

Instructions
 

Rinse the watermelon and pat it dry.
Using a sharp chef's knife, carefully slice the watermelon in half crosswise (not lengthwise) so you have two pieces that have a round, circular cut side (if you cut it lengthwise, you'd have an oval).
A fresh watermelon cut in half
Starting with the first half: trim off the stem end of the watermelon so that you can see some of the red flesh easily peaking through the circle.
Turn the melon face down on the cutting board (so that the larger, fully cut side is flat against the board.
Starting at the top, stem end, hold your knife at an angle and gently cut down towards the cutting board so that you remove a strip of the rind. Cut deep enough to where the rind is fully removed and you see the dark pink flesh of the watermelon (remove all of the white/very light pink part. You'll lose some of the red with it, but that's OK.).
A watermelon being sliced with a knife
Rotate the melon and repeat, continuing until you have cut away all of the rind.
Cut the melon horizontally into thirds, so that you end up with 3 pieces that are each a full circle.
A watermelon with the rind removed and cut into thirds
Cut each circle into cubes of your desired size.
A watermelon being cut into cubes
Repeat with the second melon half.
Watermelon being cut with a knife
Place in a container and chill in the refrigerator for at least 4 hours (for icy cold watermelon) or refrigerate for up to 3 days or freeze for 3 months or longer.
Cubes of watermelon in a container
Notes
TO STORE WATERMELON CUBES: Refrigerate watermelon cubes in an airtight storage container for up to 4 days.
TO FREEZE: Lay the watermelon pieces in a single layer on a parchment-lined baking sheet, and freeze until solid.
Once frozen, transfer the pieces to an airtight freezer-safe storage container or ziptop bag and freeze for up to 3 months.
Nutrition
SERVING: 1cup cubed
CALORIES: 46kcal
CARBOHYDRATES: 11g
PROTEIN: 1g
FAT: 1g
SATURATED FAT: 1g
POTASSIUM: 170mg
FIBER: 1g
SUGAR: 9g
VITAMIN A: 865IU
VITAMIN C: 12mg
CALCIUM: 11mg
IRON: 1mg
Join today and start saving your favorite recipes
Create an account to easily save your favorite projects and tutorials.

REGISTER
DID YOU TRY THIS RECIPE?
I want to see!

Follow @wellplated on Instagram, snap a photo, and tag it #wellplated. I love to know what you are making!

Share this Article
This post contains some affiliate links, which means that I make a small commission off items you purchase at no additional cost to you.

YOU MAY ALSO LIKE
Roasted spaghetti squash with seasonings
SIDE DISHES

Roasted Spaghetti Squash
 50 MINS

Healthy roasted red peppers in a jar
SIDE DISHES

Roasted Red Peppers
 30 MINS

perfectly cooked slices of oven baked bacon on sheets of white paper toweling
BREAKFAST & BRUNCH

Oven Baked Bacon
 25 MINS

FREE EMAIL SERIES
5 Secrets for Cooking Tasty and Healthy
My secrets for making wholesome meals you'll WANT to eat.
First Name *
First Name...
Email Address *
Email Address...
GET THE SECRETS! →

Erin Clarke
Hi, I'm Erin Clarke, and I'm fearlessly dedicated to making healthy food that's affordable, easy-to-make, and best of all DELISH. I'm the author and recipe developer here at wellplated.com and of The Well Plated Cookbook. I adore both sweets and veggies, and I am on a mission to save you time and dishes. WELCOME!

LEARN MORE ABOUT ERIN

 
 
 
 
Leave a Comment
DID YOU MAKE THIS RECIPE?

Don't forget to leave a review!

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

RECIPE RATING
Recipe Rating
COMMENT
NAME *

EMAIL *

Notify me of replies to my comment via email.

16 Comments
LEAVE A COMMENT

Peggy
July 21, 2020 at 1:28 pm
When I was pregnant in the hot summer, my husband would cut and seed a giant watermelon for me every other day. He didn’t eat any, because he wanted me to feed my extreme craving for it! There is nothing like it! Thanks for the watermelon smoothie recipe! I can’t wait to try it!

REPLY
Erin Clarke
July 22, 2020 at 12:09 pm
I hope you enjoy the smoothie if you try it, Peggy!

REPLY
Dolores Gatward
July 22, 2020 at 9:46 am
Sounds easy enough , will try it5 stars

REPLY
Erin Clarke
July 22, 2020 at 12:16 pm
I hope you enjoy it, Dolores!

REPLY
Deborah Wright
July 26, 2020 at 10:04 pm
This was super helpful, thank you!! Before this, I too was daunted by cutting watermelon and avoided buying it, even though I love it. Growing up I always looked forward to the summer and eating large slices of watermelon that usually got all over my face, lol! Now I can easily enjoy it again without being afraid of cutting it. Thanks for the hack!5 stars

REPLY
Erin Clarke
July 27, 2020 at 12:22 pm
I’m so happy that you found this helpful, Deborah! Thank you for sharing this kind review!

REPLY
Cristina
August 17, 2020 at 1:34 pm
Thank you, Erin! This was really helpful ❤

REPLY
Erin Clarke
August 18, 2020 at 11:17 am
I’m so happy to hear that, Cristina! Thank you for sharing this kind comment!

REPLY
Karis
June 1, 2021 at 10:50 am
Love this!!5 stars

REPLY
Erin Clarke
June 3, 2021 at 7:56 am
Thanks so much Karis!

REPLY
David Nunn-Telfort
June 21, 2021 at 10:45 pm
Great tips!5 stars

REPLY
Erin Clarke
June 23, 2021 at 11:54 am
Hi David! So glad you enjoyed the tips! Thank you for this kind review!

REPLY
Edward
July 8, 2021 at 2:59 pm
Great technique. Cutting crosswise, then cutting off the ends makes it very helpful to know how deep to cut to get the rind off. Came out great. Wondering how long to let it defrost if freezing. Put it in the fridge, then wait how long for it to unfreeze?

REPLY
Erin Clarke
July 8, 2021 at 3:40 pm
Hi Edward! I use my frozen watermelon cubes in smoothies that don’t require me to defrost them. If you decide to experiment defrosting them let me know how it goes!

REPLY
Gabe Davidson
August 22, 2021 at 9:22 pm
Just wondering if you’ve ever considered cutting into slices? That way you have a built in holder (rind) for the kids. In my opinion, slices seems like the far superior watermelon cutting method.

REPLY
Erin Clarke
August 23, 2021 at 4:24 pm
Hi Gabe, you could definitely try that out. This just happens to be my favorite way to do it!

REPLY
Well Plated by Erin
 
 
 
 
ABOUT
About Erin
Cookbook
Contact
Subscribe
Cooking Tips & Tricks
Travel
Work With Me
RECIPES
Appetizers
Mains
Soups & Stews
Salads
Slow Cooker
Sides
Breakfast & Brunch
Desserts
View All Recipes
© 2010 - 2021 Well Plated by Erin. Disclosure & Privacy Policy

 BACK TO TOP
