How to Cut a Pineapple
Jessica Gavin
Published on May 4, 2018

Save to FavoritesJump to Recipe
Learn how to cut a pineapple with this simple step-by-step guide. The sweet golden flesh can be sliced and diced for a tropical fruit snack or used in various recipes.

Bowl of fresh cut pineapple chunks
The thick prickly skin and pokey crown of a pineapple may seem like a challenge to cut, but the process is quite simple! Follow these easy steps on how to cut a pineapple so the delicious crowned royal fruit can be added to any recipe and enjoyed all year long.

The first step is figuring out how to pick a pineapple. The peak season is from March to July and most pineapples are harvested at its peak ripeness, so once they hit the store they should be ready to eat. The tricky part is that depending on the grower and variety, some pineapples may still have a slightly green flesh when ripe or a more golden hue.

The senses can be your best indicator for knowing when a pineapple is ripe. Pick it up and smell the bottom of the fruit for a sweet, and not fermented aroma. If it still smells very green, then it’s not very ripe. The outside skin and leaves should have some shine and not be dull. The outer skin should also feel firm with a slight give. Once you’ve selected the perfect fresh pineapple, it’s time to cut it up!

How to Cut a Pineapple
This guide for how to cut a pineapple is the easiest method that I’ve found after many delicious testing opportunities. The key here is to make sure to use a sharp chef’s knife and a stable cutting board before you get started.

STEP 1: Slice Off the Crown and Bottom
Photo of a person showing how to cut a pineapple with a chef's knife
Place the fruit on a cutting board and lay the pineapple on its side. Secure the pineapple with one hand, and then slice off the top, about 1/2-inch down from where the green crown and flesh meet.

Person using a chef's knife to cut the bottom of a pineapple
Turn the pineapple around and trim off about 1/2-inch from the bottom of the fruit.

STEP 2: Trim the Skin
Person holding a pineapple up and trimming the sides off
Stand the pineapple up on the bottom side. Carefully trim the thick fibrous skin, starting from the top to the bottom, being careful to preserve as much of the sweet flesh as possible. Cut around the pineapple, following the natural curve of the fruit until all of the skin is removed.

Step 3: Remove the Eyes
Person using a paring knife to remove the eyes from the pineapple
There will be brown circular “eyes” left in the pineapple flesh which are inedible. It’s a little more work to remove them, but worthwhile if you’re cutting rings or thick slices. Use a small paring knife to make shallow diagonal V-shaped cuts in a spiral diagonal pattern to remove the eyes. Carefully cut the eyes out in a connected diagonal slope, turning the pineapple until all of the eyes are gone.

When cutting smaller slices or chunks of pineapple, I found it equally easy to trim off the eyes as I’m cutting the fruit into smaller pieces, which is what I did for this guide below.

Step 3: Remove the Core (2 Ways)
Method 1: For Spears or Chunks
Person cutting down the center of a pineapple with no skin
Cut the cleaned pineapple in half through the center.

Person using a knife to cut down a piece of pineapple
To make slices or diced pineapples, cut the pineapple into 4 pieces lengthwise.

Person using a knife to cut the core of the pineapple
Cut the thick and fibrous core from the center of each wedge.

Method 2: For Rings of Chunks
Person using a knife to slice the pineapple into rings
If you’re making rings, then cut the rings into desired thickness. This works best when you have already removed the eyes using the spiral cut method.

Person using a round cutter to remove the core of the pineapple
Use a round cookie cutter or biscuit cutter to remove the core. I used a 1 1/2-inch round cutter.

Step 4: Cut into Pieces
Person using a knife to cut pineapple into small chunks
Cut each quarter into spears, slices, chucks, or smaller bite-sized pieces.

Person using a knife to dice the pineapple
If you made rings, cut the pineapple into chunks.

Add the pineapples to a colorful fruit salad, into a pineapple salsa, popsicles, or smoothies.

Storing
If you’ve selected a good pineapple, it’s best to eat it within the first few days to avoid deterioration. Store at room temperature on the counter for a few days, or prolong the shelf life by placing it in a plastic bag in the refrigerator and eat within 3 to 5 days.

Sliced or diced pineapple should be stored in an airtight container in the refrigerator for up to 3 to 5 days, disposing of them once they start to smell fermented. Cut pineapples can also be stored in a resealable plastic bag with as much air removed as possible for 12 months.

More pineapple recipes
Blackened Chicken Tacos
Pineapple Upside-Down Cake
Pineapple Popsicles