How to Do the Macarena
Download Article
PARTS
1Learning the Basic Steps
2Putting It All Together
OTHER SECTIONS
Questions & Answers
VideoWATCH NOW
Related Articles
References
Article Summary
Co-authored by wikiHow Staff
Last Updated: November 17, 2020 Tested

The Macarena is a Spanish dance that’s danced to the song “Macarena” by Los Del Rio. To do the Macarena, you need learn the basic step sequence. Once you’ve got that down, you can work on loosening your body and adding some flair to the dance. Make sure you have something to play music on so you can dance to the song!

Part
1
Learning the Basic Steps


1
Bring your arms out in front of you one at a time. Bring your right arm out first, then your left arm. Your arms should be parallel with the floor. Your palms should be facing down.


2
Turn your palms upward one at a time. Turn your right palm up first, then turn your left palm up. Rotate your forearms outward to turn your palms up.


3
Place your right hand on your left shoulder. Keep your elbow on the right side of your body. Your forearm should be crossed over your chest.


4
Place your left hand on your right shoulder. Cross your left arm over your right arm on your chest. Both your palms should be on your shoulders. Your forearms should be crossed in an “X” shape on your chest.


5
Put your hands on the back of your head one at a time. Start by sliding your right arm out from under your left arm on your chest. Bring your right hand up and around to the back of your head. Then put your left hand on the back of your head.
It’s OK if your left hand overlaps with your right hand.


6
Bring your hands down to your hips one at a time. First bring your right hand down to your left hip. Then bring your left hand down to your right hip.


7
Move your hands to the opposite hip one at a time. Move your right hand (currently on your left hip) over to your right hip. Then move your left hand (currently on your right hip) over to your left hip.


8
Move your hips around in a circle 3 times. Keep your hands on your hips as you rotate them. Your feet should stay planted on the ground.


9
Jump and turn your body 90 degrees to the left. When you land, you should be facing a new direction. Each time you finish the basic dance sequence, jump and turn 90 degrees to the left.


10
Clap your hands and repeat the sequence. Run through the same steps, this time facing in a different direction. When you finish the step sequence again, jump and turn 90 degrees to the left.
Part
2
Putting It All Together
Image titled Do the Macarena Step 1
1
Play the song “Macarena.” The Macarena is always danced to “Macarena.” The original song is by Los Del Rio, but you can dance to any version!


2
Start moving your hips side to side. Let your shoulders move up and down as you do it. The goal is to loosen up your body. This isn’t a part of the actual dance, but it will keep your from looking stiff while you’re doing the steps.[1]
There’s a brief intro to the song before the lyrics start. Use this time to start loosening up your body for the dance.


3
Start dancing when the lyrics in the song start. Remember, you start by putting out your right arm, then left arm, with your palms facing down. Each step should be 1 count, or about 1 second.


4
Remember to turn 90 degrees after each step sequence. You should be turning on the jump after you rotate your hips. After you turn, clap your hands and repeat the step sequence.


5
Keep dancing until the song is over. Run through the step sequence, jump and turn, and repeat! If you get tired of dancing before the songs over, just stop and exit the dance floor.
