How To Deadlift
EXERCISES
It’s called the King Of Lifts for a reason. Here’s how to master the deadlift
FACEBOOK
TWITTER
PINTEREST

 JOEL SNAPE COACH STAFF 17 AUG 2021
Weightlifting in its purest form is lifting something up and putting it back down. That’s the deadlift in a nutshell. It’s simplicity personified and one of the best muscle-growing, strength-building, health-improving moves around.

Performed safely, the deadlift will strengthen every bone in your body, challenge every muscle across your posterior chain (all the muscles that run from your neck to your heels) and test your grip strength and core stability to the absolute max. It will find any chink in your armour that you need to address if you hope to lift heavy. For that reason you should always start light, within your means, and build up the weight once your technique is flawless.

It’s a great addition to the routine of anyone who’s guilty of just training their “mirror muscles” on the front of the body – think chest, abs and quads – at the expense of those on the rear of the body, especially the lower back and hamstrings. Doing so will result in an unbalanced physique,and significant strength discrepancies between synergistic muscle groups that leads to injury. 

The deadlift and its variants will also prove hugely beneficial to anyone who play sports. The activation it places on the hamstrings, glutes and quadriceps (if you adopt a sumo or trap bar stance) are invaluable for activities that require explosive leg strength – rugby, football, and track and field to name just three. These muscles are also vital in endurance sports such as swimming, cycling and running. The deadlift helps to keep them strong and in tip-top condition, preventing injury while also significantly boosting strength.

As a big compound lift, it also prompts your body to release growth hormones and testosterone, further increasing your bone density and muscular hypertrophy – so say goodbye to not being able to lift your sofa up to reach the remote.

The deadlift is one of the three core exercises in any strength training plan, along with the barbell squat and the bench press. With so many variations to activate different muscle groups it’s a great strength builder – you will find that you progress through the weight fairly quickly. You’ll fire up lots of muscle fibres during the move – much more important than a quick arm pump – and racking up big numbers on the deadlift will boost your confidence in the gym too.

Follow our tips and aim for the holy grail of a double bodyweight deadlift.

How To Deadlift: Form Guide

The deadlift is one of the best total-body moves for building muscle and burning fat, but only if you do it right. Use strength coach Andy McKenzie’s form advice to nail the lift.

To start, here’s an overview of the basic movement. “Standing with your feet shoulder-width apart, grasp the bar with your hands just outside your legs,” says McKenzie. “Lift the bar by driving your hips forwards, keeping a flat back. Lower the bar under control – though once you get up to really heavy weights, it’s OK to drop it on your final rep.”


Of course, there’s much more to consider if you want perfect form (and believe us when you say you do). Here are some of the finer points to master.

“Place your thumbs against the outer part of your thigh, and run both hands down until they touch the bar,” says McKenzie. “This is your ideal hand position.

“As for your grip, you have two choices: a double overhand grip or a mixed grip, where one hand grips the bar overhand and the other underhand. The mixed grip will allow you to lift heavier, but make sure you switch hands regularly to prevent developing any muscular imbalances.

“Always ensure you squeeze the bar as hard as you can, especially in heavier sets, before the bar leaves the floor.

“Keep your head in a neutral position throughout the lift. This is achieved by looking forwards with your eyes fixed to a spot on the ground about two to three metres ahead of your feet. And focus on keeping your chin up to keep your head in the best position for lifting.

“You want to maintain a strong spine from the beginning of the lift to the end, and the best way to achieve this is to keep your chest up throughout to prevent your torso hunching forwards over the bar.

“You need to keep your abs braced throughout the entire move to maintain an arched lower back and a strong and stable body, especially when attempting heavier lifts. Engage your core from the very start so your abs are tensed as you squat down to grip the bar. As you are about to lift the bar, breathe deep into your belly, hold your breath, and brace your abs hard, like you’re about to be punched in the stomach.”

“Your shoulders should remain slightly in front of your hands until the bar passes mid-thigh level, at which point you want to retract your shoulder blades for a strong and stable torso.”


Deadlift Challenges
Try these horrible but rewarding deadlift challenges to get bigger, leaner and stronger than ever.

Get lean with deadlift EMOMs
What EMOM stands for Every Minute On The Minute. Get a weight you can lift for 15 reps (this will be approximately 65% of the weight you could lift once), start a clock and do as many reps as you can in 30 seconds. Rest for 30 seconds and then repeat on the minute, every minute, for ten minutes.

Why You complete a huge amount of work in a short space of time, which will get your heart pumping.

Get big with deadlift GVT
What  German Volume Training was popularised by strength coach Charles Poliquin. In this workout, you use a weight that’s approximately 60% of what you could lift for one rep. Do ten reps, rest for 90 seconds and repeat that ten times. If you fail before the end of a set, do as many reps as you can.

Why Maximising volume – the total amount of weight you lift – is one of the keys to muscle growth.

Get strong with a 1RM test
What Your 1RM (one-rep max) is the amount of weight you can lift for one rep. After a thorough warm-up, do two or three reps at about 50% of your maximum lift. Add 10-20kg to the bar and repeat until you get to around 85% of your maximum. Then add 5kg and do one rep until you fail. Your last successful lift is your 1RM.

Why The most effective way to get stronger is to focus on performing low-rep sets.

Deadlift Variations
Romanian deadlift

This variation shifts the emphasis to your hamstrings, building flexibility as well as strength, power and control in these often neglected leg muscles. Stand tall with your feet shoulder-width apart, holding a barbell off the floor with an overhand grip just outside your thighs. Keeping a slight bend in your knees, bend forwards from the hips – not the waist – and lower the bar down the front of your shins until you feel a good stretch in your hamstrings. There’s no need to go heavy for the Romanian deadlift to be effective, so start small.

Snatch-grip deadlift

The wider grip employed here places greater emphasis on your upper back (trapezius) muscles. You’ll also need to move the bar through a greater range of motion. Hold a barbell with your hands approximately double shoulder-width apart. Push through your heels and keep your chest up as you drive forwards with your hips to lift the bar.

Trap bar deadlift

You may also find this version referred to as the hex bar deadlift, owing to the hexagonal shape of the bar that’s used. This is a brilliantly effective version of the deadlift, with the side-on position of the trap bar handles forcing you to retract your shoulder blades and engage your lats. It’s great for making swift strength gains and doesn’t put as much pressure on your lower back as other deadlift variants because you won’t be pulled forwards.

Deficit deadlift

Lifting from a “deficit” – an artificially lower start position – will fix any weakness in your deadlift form, forcing you to keep your back flat and shoulders engaged to get the bar off the ground. Stand on a weight plate or low box and grasp the bar. Engage your shoulders and take the strain, then lift the bar by driving your hips forwards, keeping a flat back.

Sumo deadlift

This variation targets the muscles in your hamstrings, making it a great builder for leg power, and as with the Romanian deadlift it’s wise to use a significantly lighter weight. Place your feet wider apart and grasp the bar with a slightly narrower grip than you would with a regular deadlift.

Rack pull

If you find the range of motion of normal deadlifts too strenuous, start with the barbell raised on blocks or a rack. This is a good variation to start with until you are more confident with the movement required because it places less strain on your lower back.

Single-leg Romanian deadlift

This unilateral move develops balance, ankle stability and your hamstrings, but it can be very tricky, especially for your first few attempts, so master the bodyweight version first before adding free weights. Stand on one leg, then hinge forwards at your hips, sending your elevated leg backwards to help maintain your balance and reaching towards your toes until you feel a stretch in your hamstring. Reverse the move to the start.


See related 
7 Essential Barbell Exercises To Get Stronger
How To Do The Stiff-Leg Deadlift
5 Barbell Workouts To Burn Fat Fast
How To Dominate Deadlifts
With advice from former world record holder Andy Bolton

1. Set up for success
“Start with your feet shoulder-width apart and the bar touching your shins. Begin with a double-overhand grip with your hands slightly wider apart than your feet, but switch to a reverse grip for when the weights get heavier.”

2. Lift in harmony
“Take the tension of the bar. You need to pull it hard and fast but never snatch it or you’ll risk injury. Looking straight ahead, exhale, then take a deep breath and drive your heels into the floor, and push up using the muscles of both your lower back and legs so that the bar reaches your knees.”

3. Drive and lock
“Ensure that your legs lock and your back straightens at the same time. Once you’re straight, retract your shoulder blades and hold your head high, keeping the bar under full control. Then reverse every part of the move to lower the bar back to the ground.”

More Deadlift Tips
Go shoeless
Most lower-body moves will benefit from lifting shoes, but in deadlifts they’re counter-productive – not only will they give you more height to lift, but they’ll tilt you slightly forward, throwing your movement pattern off. For best results, lift in flat shoes – think Converse – or in socks or barefoot. It’ll give you a stable platform to lift from.

Scrape your shins
The further the bar strays from your body, the harder to lift it will be – there’s a reason world champ Eddie Hall ends every record attempt with bleeding shins. Start your lift with your toes under the bar and your shins against it, then pull straight up. You might want to invest in a long pair of socks.

Belt up
You can instantly add around 12kg to your deadlift simply by wearing a weight lifting belt. Breathing into your stomach and pushing against the belt with your abdominal muscles will increase intra-abdominal pressure, creating a more stable core, a necessity when lifting heavier weights.

Get a grip
It won’t matter how much you strengthen your back and your legs, you won’t be able to deadlift heavy weights if your hands can’t hold the barbell. To develop a strong grip, try using chalk and practice white knuckling (gripping any bar that you encounter as hard as you can) to tighten that grasp.

Additional reporting by Scott Blake (@Scott_Blakey)