Shooter (drink)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Shooter" drink – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

A B-52 shooter served in a shot glass

A sake oyster shooter
A shooter, or shot, is a small serving of spirits or a mixed drink (usually about one ounce), typically consumed quickly, often in a single gulp. It is common to serve a shooter as a "side" to a larger drink.[1]

Shooters can be shaken, stirred, blended, layered, or simply poured. Shot glasses or sherry glasses are the usual drinkware in which shooters are served. They are most commonly served at bars, and some bartenders have their own "signature" shooter.

The ingredients of shooters vary from bartender to bartender and from region to region. Two shooters can have the same name but different ingredients, resulting in two very different tastes.


Contents
1	List of drink shots
1.1	Shooters with beer
1.2	Shooters with non-alcoholic bases
1.3	Shooters with Irish cream
1.4	Shooters with rum
1.5	Shooters with tequila
1.6	Shooters with vodka
1.7	Shooters with whiskey/whisky or bourbon
1.8	Shooters with wine, sparkling wine, or port
1.9	Cocktails with less common spirits
2	See also
3	References
4	External links
List of drink shots
Shooters with beer
See also: Beer and Category:Cocktails with beer
Mixed shooters
Boilermaker or Depth Charge: a beer mix
Snakebite: variations and alternate names: Snakebite and black, Diesel, Snakey B, Purple nasty, Purple, Black, Deadly snakebite, Hard snakebite, and Super snakebite.
U-Boot: a beer mix
Irish Car Bomb: a mix of Irish whisky and Irish cream or other ingredients in a pint-glass of Irish stout.
Shooters with non-alcoholic bases
Mixed shooters
Jägerbomb, or Bulldozer, or Blaster: a shot glass with Jägermeister dropped into a glass of half a can of Red Bull. In German speaking countries this drink is called Fliegender Hirsch (Flying Deer). It can also be made by filling a shot glass with half Jägermeister and half Red Bull or by placing a shot glass full of Jägermeister at the bottom of a glass and filling with Red Bull.
Geritol: a shot glass with Grand Marnier dropped into a glass of half a can of Red Bull. It can also be made by filling a shot glass with half Grand Marnier and half Red Bull or by placing a shot glass full of Grand Marnier at the bottom of a glass and filling with Red Bull.
Shooters with Irish cream

A Brain Hemorrhage layered shooter.
See also: Irish cream
Layered shooters
B-52 (and related B-50 series cocktails).
Baby Guinness: Two thirds to three quarters of a shot glass filled with coffee liqueur. Irish Cream poured gently, over the back of a spoon, onto the top of the liqueur. The finished result should give the impression, if done correctly, of a tiny pint of Stout.
Cocksucking Cowboy (also called the Brokeback Shooter): two parts cold butterscotch schnapps with one part of Irish Cream, making it 32% ABV. The Irish Cream is poured off the back of a bar spoon so it "floats" on top of the schnapps in a shot glass.
Irish Flag: Crème de menthe (green), Irish cream and Grand Marnier in a shot glass. The end result is a very small Irish flag.
Shooters with rum

Two Liquid Marijuana shots side by side
See also: Rum and Category:Cocktails with rum
Layered shooters
Flaming B-52 (also B-51, B-52 with Bomb-bay Doors, B-53, B-54, B-55, and B-57)
Shooters with tequila
See also: Tequila and Category:Cocktails with tequila
Mixed shooters
Mexican Prairie Fire: see Prairie Fire.
Tequila Slammer
Tequesso: A shot of Tequila (often Patrón) chased by a shot of coffee
Layered shooters
Shooters with vodka

A Pineapple Upside-Down Cake Shooter
See also: Vodka and Category:Cocktails with vodka
Mixed shooters
Lemon Drop: A chilled shot of lemon-flavored vodka served with a lemon wedge covered in sugar. One takes the shot, then bites the lemon. Vodka with lemon juice can be substituted if no lemon-flavored vodka is available.
Ruffe (see Boilermaker).
Kamikaze: vodka, triple sec, and Lime juice, mixed in equal parts. It is also served traditionally.
Snakebite with venom, poison snakebite, or turbo diesel (see Snakebite).
U-Boot
Shooters with whiskey/whisky or bourbon
See also: Whiskey, Irish whiskey, Scotch whisky, Tennessee whiskey, Bourbon whiskey, and Canadian whisky
Mixed shooters
Canadian Prairie Fire (see Prairie Fire)
Prairie Fire
Pickleback: A shot of whiskey (often Jameson) chased by a shot of pickle brine.
Washington Apple: Equal parts Canadian whisky, sour apple liqueur, and cranberry juice[2]
Shooters with wine, sparkling wine, or port
See also: Wine, Sparkling wine, and Port wine
Mixed shooters
Slammer Royale (see Tequila Slammer)
Cocktails with less common spirits
See also: Category:Mixed drinks
Mixed shooters
Bazooka Joe: equal parts Irish Cream, Blue Curaçao and Banana liqueur (Pisang Ambon)[3]
Nazi Taco: Jägermeister and Tequila in equal parts. Generally Jose Quervo is used.
Golden Elk: Jägermeister and Goldschläger
Jäger Bomb
Redneck Prairie Fire: see Prairie Fire.
Sake bomb
Layered shooters
Pousse Cafe
See also
icon	Liquor portal
Bartender
Bomb shot
Cocktail
Drinking culture
Flair bartending
List of cocktails
References
 DeGroff, Dale (2002). The craft of the cocktail : everything you need to know to be a master bartender, with 500 recipes (1st ed.). New York: Clarkson Potter/Publishers. ISBN 9780307762276. OCLC 669067001.
 "Washington Apple Shot Recipe". Bevvy. 13 May 2015. Retrieved 29 December 2016.
 "Bazooka Joe Cocktail Recipe". 1001cocktails. Retrieved 23 August 2013.
