How to Eat a Watermelon
Download Article
PARTS
1Eating Watermelon Basics
2Slicing Watermelon
3Making Watermelon Recipes
OTHER SECTIONS
Questions & Answers
Tips and Warnings
Related Articles
References
Article Summary
Author Info
Last Updated: May 1, 2021 References

Watermelon is sweet, subtle, low in calories, and contains cancer-fighting and energy boosting properties.[1] It's a delicious snack and a great way to start the day for breakfast. Get an overview of the watermelon basics, including eating raw and slicing, as well as some more creative ideas about preparing watermelon.

Part
1
Eating Watermelon BasicsDownload Article
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 11
Pick a ripe one. Picking a ripe watermelon doesn't need to be a total mystery. There are two basic ways to pick a melon that's ripened to perfection, which involve using your eyes and your hands:
Feel the melon. Pick it up and feel the weight. Good melons should feel slightly heavier than they look. That means they're juicy and sweet. If you tap a melon, your knuckles should bounce back. If the melon feels hollow or soft, that's a bad sign. The surface should feel quite firm. Bumpiness is a sign of irregular watering.[2]
Look at the melon. Ripe melons should have a "field spot," which is usually yellowish or brownish on one side, which may be slightly flatter. This means the melon was allowed to ripen for a while on the ground before being picked. Avoid any melons with a very shiny green surface, which is a sign of under-ripeness.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 22
Rinse the outside. Even though you don't eat the rind of the watermelon, it's still a good idea to give it a rinse. The knife you use to cut it up will pass through the outside, which can still have residual pesticides and other stuff from the dirt on it. Even if you grew it yourself, it's still a good idea to give it a rinse before you cut it up.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 33
Cut melon into wedges or chunks. There's no wrong way to eat watermelon. The most classic way is to slice it into hand-held pieces and eat it right down to the rind, but cutting up melon into chunks and eating with skewers or a fork is also perfectly delicious.
Place the clean, dry melon on a flat cutting surface. You can stabilize the melon with your your hand on the other end of the melon, or by placing the melon on a towel.
Use a sharp chef's knife to cut watermelon, and keep your fingers clear of the knife as you work.
Check out the next section for different ways to slice up your watermelon.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 44
Watch out for the seeds. Most watermelons have lots of hard black and white seeds throughout the flesh. Part of the fun or the challenge of eating watermelon is negotiating these seeds and getting rid of them. Spit them into a small cup if you're inside, or take the melon outside and have a spitting contest in the yard. It's hard to do elegantly.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 55
Chill your watermelon. Watermelon is great, but chilled melon in the summertime? Out of this world. If you've picked a ripe melon, storing it in the refrigerator will help to keep it fresh as well as add some refreshing coolness to the melon. It's always a good idea.
It's hard to eat a whole watermelon at once. If your group can't finish one, cut it into chunks and store them in a bowl in the fridge, or cover the melon with plastic wrap and put it cut-side up in the refrigerator. It'll be even better when it's cool.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 66
Try adding a small amount of salt. While it might sound strange, some people like to add a very small sprinkling of salt to watermelon. The thought is, the salt creates a sweet-salty contrast that makes the melon actually taste a little sweeter.[3] Watermelon's pretty subtle, though. If you want to try salting yours, it's important to use a very small portion of salt. Don't overwhelm the fruit.
Try putting out a little dish of salt and dipping the melon into it, rather than dumping it onto the fruit. Much easier to control the portions.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 77
Add lime juice and chili powder. One great way to lively up some bland or underripe melon is chili powder. A little spritz of lime juice and a kick of chili powder? Boom. Your melon's back in business.[4] In a small dish, mix the following ingredients and dust the melon gently with a light coating:
1 tablespoon of coarse salt
1 teaspoon of ground chile
Zest and juice of 1 lime
Part
2
Slicing WatermelonDownload Article
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 81
Cut into large slices. Trim off one end of the watermelon using a sharp chef's knife, then cut 1-inch thick sections off the melon, across the middle. Cut these in half to make two half-moon shaped slices, or cut again into triangles. Hold by the rind and enjoy.
You can also cut down the middle of the watermelon long-ways, then cut extra-long sections of watermelon to dive into. They might be messy, so it's best to eat them outside.
Some people also like to start in the center, cutting the melon in half to get right to the juiciest parts of the melon. This can be effective, especially if you've got a really big watermelon. There's no wrong way.
What do you do with the melon in the end-piece? Scoop it out with a spoon.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 92
Cut watermelon into chunks. Another great and easy way to serve watermelon is to cut it up into bite-sized chunks and store them in a bowl. Cut big slices as normal, then use a smaller paring knife to remove the whitish-green rind from the melon. Cut into chunks that suit your taste.
Cut into cubes, triangles, or other shapes. Use butter knives with your kids to let them chop up watermelon into animal shapes, or letters. Or use cookie cutters for real fun.
Some people like peeling the rind off before chunking up a watermelon. This can be done with a sharp chef's knife and some care, stabilizing the melon on a flat cut side, or it can be done with a vegetable peeler.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 103
Try slicing wedges. One innovating way of cutting up watermelon involves chopping it as you might an onion or a potato. This is an excellent way of serving watermelon as finger-food at a slightly fancier affair, because it'll cause less mess.
Use a small rounded melon, or cut off an end-section of the melon no larger than about a half-basketball size. Place the melon cut-side down on the cutting board.
Make cross-hatch cuts in the melon, spaced about 1-inch apart. Cut straight across the melon at 1-inch intervals going on direction, then make perpendicular cuts in the other directions.
Serve as is. Have guests pull out the long-skinny sections to munch on and provide a bowl for the rinds.
Part
3
Making Watermelon RecipesDownload Article
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 111
Make a blended watermelon drink. Watermelon makes the perfect subtle base for a blended drink. Why use water when you can use watermelon? Try out the following watermelon drinks:
For the simplest and most delicious blended melon drink, try mixing 2-3 cups of chopped and de-seeded watermelon with 1-2 cups of cantaloupe. Blend thoroughly in a blender, then add the juice of half a lime, and sugar to taste, if necessary. Use honey for a natural alternative.
Mix blended watermelon with cucumber, gin, and mint leaves for a twist on a summer cocktail.
Want to lively up some lemonade? Blend up some watermelon chunks and mix with equal parts lemonade for a delicious summer treat. Garnish with strawberry, or mint leaves.
Use watermelon to sweeten green smoothies. Blend up two cups of kale, a half cup of parsley, and half an avocado, then add three cups worth of cubed watermelon and some pineapple juice to sweeten.[5]
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 122
Make a cold melon soup. Gazpacho made with watermelon as a main component can be a delicious and refreshing summer treat. Using little additions to emphasize the sweetness and sourness of the watermelon can be elegant and delicious.
In a blender, mix up 6-9 cups of cubed and seeded watermelon, one cup of sweet Riesling or other sweet wine, one teaspoon of fresh chopped ginger, the juice of half a lemon, a teaspoon of sugar, and chopped fresh mint to taste.
Chill the mixture for at least half an hour, then serve topped with chopped mint and crumbled feta cheese.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 133
Make watermelon salad. Watermelon can make for a cool, crunchy feature for a summertime salad, adding sweetness and subtle flavor. Here are a few ideas for simple salads that only involve a few ingredients:
Mix thin-sliced cubes of watermelon with slices of cucumber, raw onion (optional), tomato, chopped mint or basil, a teaspoon or two of apple cider vinegar, salt and pepper to taste.
Layer slices of watermelon, cooled and sliced roasted beet, chunks of blue cheese, and basil leaf.[6]
Mix a few cups of arugula with chopped watermelon, walnuts, feta cheese, mint leaves, and dress with lemon juice, chopped shallot, olive oil, and salt and pepper to taste.
Image titled Eat a Watermelon Step 144
Make balsamic watermelon skewers. A classy summer appetizer or snack combines sweet and savory together on a plate. Plus you can also eat it as a skewer, which is always fun. Cut cubes of watermelon into large, bite-sized chunks, then top with a full basil leaf, a piece of feta cheese, and a drizzling of balsamic vinegar and fresh cracked pepper. Stab with a wooden skewer and serve like a sweet-favorite popsicle.