Eating a Hot Dog on a Bun with Your HandsDownload Article
Image titled Eat a Hot Dog Step 12
1
Clear the area in front of you. Because eating a hot dog requires both hands, you need the space around you to be clear. Move your drink and condiment bottles out of the way so you can't knock them over with a stray elbow, and make sure you have lots of space in front and beside you for your arms.
Image titled Eat a Hot Dog Step 13
2
Hold the hot dog with both hands. Pick up the hot dog around the middle by gently squeezing the two halves of the bun together around the meat. Use one hand to cup the bottom of the bun and the other to gently pinch the bun around the meat at the back of the hot dog. This will prevent the meat from sliding out the back as you eat.
Image titled Eat a Hot Dog Step 14
3
Hold the hot dog level. The top of the bun isn't enclosed, so you want to hold the hot dog so the meat and condiments are facing upward. If you tip the hot dog from side to side, all the condiments and sauces might fall off.[6]
Image titled Eat a Hot Dog Step 15
4
Angle the dog slightly to get the best bite. The trick with eating a hot dog is getting a bit of everything at once, including meat, bun, and condiments. Sometimes, holding the hot dog at a slight upward or downward angle can help with this. Just don’t tip it too much, otherwise you'll lose your condiments.
Image titled Eat a Hot Dog Step 16
5
Eat the hot dog in small bites. Bring the hot dog to your mouth, open your mouth wide around the bun, and bite down.[7] Don’t pull your mouth away until you're certain that you’ve bitten clean through the meat, otherwise you'll drag the whole sausage away with your first bite. Chew slowly and well before swallowing, and then take another bite.
Image titled Eat a Hot Dog Step 17
6
Have a few napkins handy. Hot dogs are eaten with the hands and not utensils, so it’s not uncommon for food to end up on your hands and face. Paper or cloth napkins can be used to wipe up spills, clean your hands, and wipe food from your face as you eat.
As long as you're not in a formal setting, it’s generally also acceptable to lick your hands to clean off sauces and condiments when you're eating hot dogs.[8]
Image titled Eat a Hot Dog Step 18
7
Serve your favorite snacks on the side. You can eat hot dogs on their own as a meal or snack, but you can also serve them with side dishes and snacks. Some of the most popular sides for hot dogs include:
Potato chips
French fries
Onion rings
Potato salad
Corn on the cob
Green salad