Eating a Donut with Your Hands
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 12
1
Eat it with your hands. Donuts are considered finger food, so it is acceptable to eat them without utensils. Pick up the donut with one hand. If you find the donut is too large, sticky, or hard to hold, use both hands to hold it like a sandwich.
To keep your hands clean while you eat, you can wrap the bottom of the donut in a napkin or piece of waxed or parchment paper.
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 13
2
Hold a topped donut flat. Many donuts come topped with things like sprinkles and other goodies. To prevent these from falling off while you're eating, hold the donut with two hands and keep the top level with the table as you eat.
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 14
3
Take small bites. Bring the whole donut to your mouth and take a small bite. Pull the donut away from your mouth while you chew and swallow your bite. Eating a donut isn't a dainty task, but you should take small bites to avoid stuffing your mouth too full or choking.
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 15
4
Watch out for filling. Some donuts have cream or jam fillings stuffed inside. These fillings can come oozing out when you bite into the center of the donut. You can suck out some of the filling if it’s dripping everywhere. Wipe your face with a napkin if you get any crumbs or filling around your mouth.
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 16
5
Pair it with a refreshing drink. Donuts are often eaten with a drink, and the liquid can help wash down the doughy treat. If you do have a drink, take sips in between bites when you get thirsty. Popular drinks for donut-eating include:
Hot chocolate
Milk
Coffee
Tea
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 17
6
Dunk it. Dunking is acceptable to do at home and in non-formal settings. To dunk your donut, bring the entire donut to your cup and dip a bite-sized piece of donut into the liquid. Hold it there for one to two seconds, which is long enough to saturate the donut but not so long that a piece will break off. Bite off the dunked portion of donut and eat it.
This works best for donuts that don’t have toppings. To dunk a topped donut, tear off a bite-sized piece of donut with your fingers and dunk the individual piece into the liquid.
Part
3
Getting Creative with Donuts
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 18
1
Glaze the donut. When you make your own donuts, you can customize them any way you like. One popular way of serving and eating donuts is with a glaze, which is a thin icing that you can drizzle on donuts, cookies, cakes and other desserts.
When the donuts are still warm, drizzle generous amounts of glaze over each donut, or dip each donut into the glaze to coat it completely.
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 19
2
Add your favorite toppings. You can finish a donut with any toppings you like. One of the most popular toppings is sprinkles, but you can experiment with any candy or other add-ons. To top a donut properly, add a glaze or icing first that will act as a glue to hold the toppings in place. Some of the more creative toppings you can try include:
Cereal
Candy-coated chocolates
Crushed cookie pieces
Candied fruit
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 20
3
Add a delicious filling. Any donut that doesn’t have the middle hole missing can be filled and stuffed with sweet treats like chocolate filling. Other popular fillings for donuts include:
Custards and creams
Vanilla frosting
Jellies, jams, and preserves
Chocolate-hazelnut spread
Cream cheese frosting
Image titled Eat a Donut Step 21
4
Turn your donut into a sandwich. Donuts are dough products just like bread, so you can get creative with your donuts by using them as a substitute for bread. Cut the donut in half to separate the top from the bottom. Add your favorite sandwich toppings to the bottom of the donut, and top the whole thing with the donut top. Sandwich filling options include:
Meat and cheese
Peanut butter and jam
Eggs and bacon
Strawberries and cream
Marshmallows and chocolate
Ice cream