Alpine body surfing : Face plants guaranteed every trip down the hill.
However, illegal collection is not the only threat facing plants in the wild.
Try to avoid frostbite and face plants.
Gotta go get frostbite and face plant.
I went after him and hit him, and did a 180 face plant on the ice.
Private sector unions faced plant closures in many manufacturing industries and demands to reduce wages and increase productivity.
Spills, skids and face plants _ not exactly a promising start for the men's Olympic gymnastics team.
The worst came from Lynch, who finished sixth despite two face plants off the high bar within 30 seconds.
Several more runs, and several face plants later, I decided that I had had enough for my first day.
The first technical term added to a beginner's vocabulary when learning to snowboard is " face plant ."
It's difficult to see face plant in a sentence .
Clearly beaten by this point, Zaytseva executed a face plant a metre from the finish line and rolled across the line in second.
The first turn is going from almost straight down to about 60 degrees downwards; however, the sled breaks directly through the mounted railroad and face plants on the ground.
During winter, north-facing plants are exposed to frigid winds but receive little, if any, direct sunlight, depending on how close to the wall they're located.
Skiing its five areas over the course of a day ( all with one lift ticket ), you'll rarely feel there's not enough elbow ( or face plant ) room.
Likewise, the short length ( usually from 70-90 centimeters _ about 28-36 inches ) eliminates the crossed tips and face plants that often frustrate novice skiers and drive them off the slopes.
I prefer sports in which my feet are on the ground, and I tend to shy away from any activity that incorporates such terminology as " face plant " to describe a type of fall.
So what did Baffert do when War Emblem nearly did a face plant coming out of the gate and lost all chance at winning the 134th running of the Belmont Stakes and capturing horse racing's most coveted prize?
With only that to go on, Gustafson spent two weeks doing face plants into the water . " Then one day I kicked off the ski and skied away, " he said . " It was the coolest.
Belcher defeated Patrick C魌?on May 8, 2010, at UFC 113 by way of rear naked choke after a controversial face plant that rocked Cote and enabled Belcher to sneak around to the back and sink in the choke.
"Jim thought it was ` biff,'my wife picked ` face plant'and I put down ` yard sale .'Then Jim picked up the Sunday paper and saw I'd won the grand prize.
Passing three people in the last 10 metres, Manangoi crossed the finish line just ahead of a desperately diving Iguider to take silver, Iguider doing a full face plant to the track across the finish line holding on to bronze.
For beginners, face plants are a common occurrence; for the intermediate snowboarder, face plants are a constant fear, and for anyone who has spent a long day on the mountain, face plants are what happen over dinner in a hot bowl of soup.
For beginners, face plants are a common occurrence; for the intermediate snowboarder, face plants are a constant fear, and for anyone who has spent a long day on the mountain, face plants are what happen over dinner in a hot bowl of soup.
For beginners, face plants are a common occurrence; for the intermediate snowboarder, face plants are a constant fear, and for anyone who has spent a long day on the mountain, face plants are what happen over dinner in a hot bowl of soup.
Perhaps the greatest feeling of the day was catching the last lift up the mountain at 4 : 30 p . m ., and winding down the trails all alone, actually able to snowboard with some coordination and a minimum of face plants after two days.
I'ed . urchedoarr, ed d I up . oug thed d toard tur0 dng . as ng ry . le ard, pt rike . y ups 30 I landed face first in the lake . ( So that's what snowboarders call face plants .)
But alas, more than 103, 000 people who showed up at Belmont Park watched War Emblem nearly do a face plant coming out of the gate and lose all chance at winning the 134th running of the Belmont Stakes and capturing horse racing's most coveted prize.
Ongoing disturbance is a key threat facing Plant Camp as the process of retrieving surface artefacts without sufficient concern for their provenance and the indiscriminate digging up of artefacts removes them from their archaeological context and thus limits our ability to obtain reliable information about the Burke and Wills expedition.
As with endangered wildlife, " habitat loss is the biggest threat facing plants, " contends Bruce Stein, a botantist and director of scientific publications at The Nature Conservancy . " That threat can be direct destruction _ like the conversion to agricultural lands, development, or clear-cutting.
Four or five flutes later, on the other hand, and you may find yourself kneeling to the porcelain god or informing your best friend one too many times, " I looove you man, no really, I looove you, " before doing a face plant into the neighbor's begonias.
It's difficult to see face plant in a sentence .
He was shooting a film session with his Monster Energy team mates in Las Vegas on the evening of October 12th and caught his front wheel in a hole that catapulted him into a face plant without time to get his hands in front of him, suffering several facial fractures, cerebral hemorrhage and damage to his C4 and C5 vertebrae.