Front Raise Guide: How to Do Front Raises With Perfect Form
Written by the MasterClass staff

Last updated: Mar 29, 2021 • 4 min read



Teaches Fitness and Wellness Fundamentals
LEARN MORE
When it comes to effective shoulder exercises, front raises are one of your best options.

Learn From the Best





SIGN UP
SAVE


SHARE

Jump To Section
What Are Front Raises?
3 Benefits of Doing Front Raises
How to Do Front Raises With Perfect Form
5 Front Raise Variations
How to Work out Safely and Avoid Injury
Want to Dive Deeper Into Your Wellness Journey?
Learn More About Joe Holder's MasterClass
What Are Front Raises?
The front raise, also known as the dumbbell front raise, is a weight training exercise that targets your shoulder muscles. Perform front raises by standing and using an overhand grip to lift a pair of dumbbells from the front of your thighs to shoulder level in front of your body. With proper form, front raises are an effective shoulder workout with many benefits.

Meet One of Your New Instructors
SIGN UP

3 Benefits of Doing Front Raises
Consider the benefits of regularly performing front raises.

Front raises tone your shoulder muscles. The front raise is an isolation exercise that activates the muscle groups in your shoulders—specifically the anterior deltoid muscles, also called the front delts. By activating your anterior deltoids, the front raise enhances the size and tone of your shoulders.
Front raises improve shoulder flexion. Front raises require your shoulder joint to go through a full range of motion, increasing mobility. Additionally, front raises engage your shoulder flexor muscles, including the anterior deltoid and pectoralis major.
Front raises work multiple muscle groups in your upper body. Even though front raises focus primarily on your shoulder muscles, they activate other muscle groups in your upper body as well, including the trapezius muscles in your upper back, the biceps and triceps muscles in your arms, the serratus anterior along your ribs, and the pectoral muscles in your chest—specifically the clavicular part of the pectoralis major.
How to Do Front Raises With Perfect Form
For the front raise, begin by performing 2–3 sets of 8–12 repetitions. Choose your sets and repetitions based on your ability to maintain good technique, focusing on form before moving up to heavier weights.

Grabbing a pair of dumbbells, and get in the starting position by standing with your feet shoulder-width apart and a slight bend in your knees. Your posture should be tall with your back straight and your shoulders over your hips. Maintain a neutral head and neck position. Your chin should remain tucked throughout the movement, as if you were holding an egg under your chin. Evenly distribute weight along each entire foot, and grip the floor with your feet to create stability.
Hold the dumbbells in front of your body with your palms facing your legs. Your arms should be long with a slight bend in your elbows. Pre-tension your shoulders and hips while engaging your core. All repetitions should begin from this position.
Initiate the upward movement by slowly lifting your arms away from your body. Lift your arms until your elbows are in line with your shoulders or just below your shoulders. Allow the shoulder blades to move naturally with the shoulder joints. Your palms should be facing the floor at the top of the movement.
Pause for a second before lowering the dumbbells.
Slowly lower your arms to return the dumbbells to the starting position.
Pause at the bottom before beginning your next repetition.
5 Front Raise Variations
Once you’ve practiced the standard front raise, shake up your routine by trying one of these front raise variations.

Barbell front raise: By using a barbell instead of a pair of dumbbells, this variation evenly distributes the weight and involves a shorter range of motion than the dumbbell front raise.
Front incline dumbbell raise: Perform this variation by sitting on an incline bench at a 45-degree angle and lifting a pair of dumbbells from your sides. The front incline dumbbell raise allows for a greater range of motion than a standard front raise.
Alternating dumbbell front raise: If you want to focus on your lifting form, practice the alternating dumbbell front raise variation, which involves lifting one arm at a time in a unilateral movement pattern.
Weight plate front raise: Practice this variation by grabbing a weight plate on either side and lifting it in front of your body. Weight plate front raises are an advanced variation that puts extra emphasis on your lower back muscles and core.
Seated dumbbell front raise: This variation uses the same equipment and movement pattern as the standard front raise. However, the seated posture takes pressure off your core and lower back, putting all of the focus on your shoulder muscles.
How to Work out Safely and Avoid Injury
If you have a previous or pre-existing health condition, consult your physician before beginning an exercise program. Proper exercise technique is essential to ensure the safety and effectiveness of an exercise program, but you may need to modify each exercise to attain optimal results based on your individual needs. Always select a weight that allows you to have full control of your body throughout the movement. When performing any exercise, pay close attention to your body, and stop immediately if you note pain or discomfort.

In order to see continual progress and build body strength, incorporate proper warm-ups, rest, and nutrition into your exercise program. Your results will ultimately be based on your ability to adequately recover from your workouts. Rest for 24 to 48 hours before training the same muscle groups to allow sufficient recovery.

Want to Dive Deeper Into Your Wellness Journey?
Throw on some athleisure, fire up a MasterClass Annual Membership, and get ready to sweat it out with exclusive instructional videos from Nike Master Trainer and GQ fitness specialist Joe Holder. Want to improve your cardiovascular endurance? Give Joe’s HIIT workout a go. Trying to get a little swole? He’s got a strength training workout for that. From fitness tips to nutrition hacks, Joe will have you feeling healthier in no time.