How to give yourself a haircut during the coronavirus shutdown
COVID-19 might keep us in our homes for several more weeks. Here's how to maintain your mane while sheltering in place.
Janet Loehrke and Jim Sergent, USA TODAY
Published 1:20 PM BRT Apr. 23, 2020 Updated 4:23 PM BRT May. 14, 2020
Many of us are weeks into mandatory shutdowns and orders to stay home, and there's a growing problem on the top of our heads.

On average, we've all added a half-inch of hair during the first month, and our next trip to the hairstylist or barber could be in weeks, if not months. 

If you've refrained from cutting it way back or haven't decided to just let it go wild, here are some tips to get ready for your next Zoom meeting or maybe just boost your spirits. 

Quarantine beard: How to maintain the new facial hair you're probably growing

Need a haircut? Want a manicure? Coronavirus leaves barber shops, nail salons struggling

Pandemic revives buzz cuts: Here’s how to shave your head the right way.

Some basic tips for cutting straight or moderately curly hair for women and men: 

How to cut women’s hair — try the twist

What you will need for the haircut

Preparing your hair for the cut
Wet hair is the easiest to cut. Be sure your hair is clean and free of hair spray or gel. Brush or comb hair, so it's free of knots or tangles.


Brush and twist

Brush and gather your hair to the very top of your head, then give it a twist. 


How to cut your hair
Depending on the amount you trim, larger cuts will create heavy layering and an angled haircut.


Release and brush out. Snip off any small hairs that may have been missed on the ends. Style as you like.

This same technique can be applied to just your bangs as well.

New hairstyle with a twist

How do you trim curly hair?
According to Vogue.com, when trimming curly hair, it's best if it is fully dry. Have your hair in its natural position and plan where and how much you would like to trim. Remembering that small snips go a long way for curly hair.


Position and trim
Trimming from the center of the top of your head, take a curl, holding it upward as far as the length allows, snipping the end to the desired length. Once you’ve trimmed that first strand, gather the neighboring strands to the right and snip, repeating on the opposite side, all around your head. Insure your cuts are guided and not random.


Gently shuffle
Once you are finished, gently run your fingers through your hair along the root line, so your newly trimmed curls will fall into shape. Snipping off any small hairs that may have been missed.


Enjoy that fresh curly cut

How to cut men's hair – the basic cut

What you need to cut your own hair

Preparing your hair for a haircut
Wet your hair. Be sure it is clean and free of hair spray or gel. Comb your hair, so it is free of knots or tangles.

Find where you normally part your hair, and comb hair upward toward the top of your head. Do this on the opposite side as well. This is so you can trim the sides of your hair first.


Trimming the sides of your hair
Using the hair clippers, pick which trimmer attachment length you prefer. Starting at the base of your hairline, run the clippers up the length of your head, but pull away just before your part line.


Continue trimming around the bottom section of your hairline, holding the hair out of the way of the trimmer. Use the handheld mirror to view the back of your head for trimming.

Cutting the top
Making sure your hair is still damp, comb your hair upward in rows, from front to back, trimming with scissors to preferred length.


This step can be used for any hairstyle, men and women.

A fresh new haircut
Style as you like. And don't worry, if you make a mistake, it will always grow out. : )


SOURCE USA TODAY research


People under quarantine are cutting their own hair and doing their own nails from home
Coronavirus quarantine has forced some people to take beauty routines like gel manicures and dying hair into their own hands.
USA TODAY
Published 1:20 PM BRT Apr. 23, 2020 Updated 4:23 PM BRT May. 14, 2020
