How to Grind Meat for Burgers, Meatballs, Sausage, and More
Grinding your own meat at home makes for better texture and fresher flavor—here's a step-by-step guide to doing it right
BY ROCHELLE BILOW

PHOTOGRAPHY BY MATT DUCKOR

March 19, 2014
How to Grind Meat for Burgers Meatballs Sausage and More Recipe
We love burgers. We love meatballs. We love sausage. We also love cooking these things ourselves, so we got to thinking: Could we be doing this better? Great cooking starts long before food hits the flame, so if you're serious about ground meat, it's high time you consider a little DIY action. We chatted with assistant food editor Claire Saffitz to take us through the steps. With the right equipment, and a little time on your side, grinding meat can be one of the easiest—and most satisfying—kitchen tasks you can tackle.

Image may contain Appliance
1/9
Step 1: Chill Out
Cold instruments are a must for a successful grind, so be sure that your grinder's tray (what holds the meat), auger (the part that looks like a corkscrew), blade (or "cutter"), and plates (the discs covered in holes of various sizes) are clean and chilled. You can store them right in your freezer so you'll be ready to grind meat at a moment's notice.

Image may contain Food Human and Person
2/9
Step 2: Choose Your Meat
"The cheap, fatty cuts are the best to use when you're grinding meat," says Saffitz. The tough bits of these cuts don't do well with roasting, grilling, or sautéing—but are easily camouflaged when they're ground. Chuck is great when you're working with beef; try shoulder when you're working with lamb and pork.

Image may contain Human Person and Food
3/9
Step 3: Get Chopping
Use a sharp knife to cut your meat into pieces—how small you should go will depend on the size of your grinder's opening, but most at-home grinders will require 1-to-2-inch pieces. Don't forget to remove the skin if your cut came with it attached, being sure to leave most of the fat attached to the meat.

Saffitz recommends grabbing a box of disposable latex gloves to have on hand when working with raw meat.

WATCH


Thai Cooking: Stuffing Sausage With a Soup Spoon

Image may contain Human Person Shop Butcher Shop and Food
4/9
Step 4: Wait a While
Cold meat grinds best, so spread your freshly chopped meat on a parchment-lined baking sheet, cover it with plastic wrap, and pop it in the freezer for 45 to 60 minutes. The goal is cold and firm—not frozen.

Image may contain Human Plumbing and Person
5/9
Step 5: Go Big (or Go Small)
Choose which plate to attach. The one with larger holes will make for a coarser grind, which is great for chili and sauce, while smaller holes yield a finer grind that's useful for sausage.

Image may contain Human Person and Bowl
6/9
Step 6: Get Grinding!
Here's the really fun part: Turn on the machine and run your chilled meat through the feeding tube of the grinder, using a stomper to push the meat down toward the blade—you don't want to get your fingers too close!

Keep a bowl underneath the grinder to catch the meat as it extrudes. If your pieces of meat start to warm up, pop them back in the freezer for a few minutes.

Image may contain Human Person Food Creme Ice Cream Dessert and Cream
7/9
Step 7: Use Your Tools
A cold tray will hold the meat as you funnel it through the feeding tube.

Image may contain Human Person and Plumbing
8/9
Step 7: Use Your Tools
Saffitz makes use of the plastic stomper, which works as an extension of her hands—so she doesn't have to stick her fingers into the feeding tube to push the last of the meat through.

Image may contain Food
9/9
Step 8: Your Call
Now what? The world is your oyster. You could use your ground meat for everything from sausages (in casings or without) and meatballs to meatloaf, burgers, and chili.