How to Juggle a Soccer Ball
 Chris Johnson  98.234 Views
To learn how to juggle a soccer ball there is one important tip; practice juggling. The more touches juggling, the better you will become.

Soccer Tip Diagram: How to Juggle a Soccer Ball
Learn How to Juggle a Soccer Ball
To learn how to juggle a soccer ball there is one important tip; practice juggling. The more touches juggling, the better you will become.

How to Juggle a Soccer Ball
So you want to learn how to juggle a soccer ball, or how to teach others to juggle? There is one critical tip that must happen to be successful at juggling. That is practice juggling. That may seem harsh and very straight forward, but the best way to master a skill is to focus on that skill until it becomes second nature.

Juggling is an essential training element which we often overlook. Juggling allows the players to use all parts of their body to gain a feel for the ball. These touches build confidence and make players aware of parts of their body used to control or pass the ball. With a larger range of comfort with the ball, this often sparks imagination in the game. A good juggler does not guarantee the player will be a good game player, as there is no substitute for match play. Juggling should become a daily routine that only takes a few minutes a day. Coaches should encourage players to develop proper juggling technique. When juggling, coaches should stress the following points:

Use all parts of the body (head, chest, thighs, and feet) and use both feet. Don’t get caught only juggling with your dominant foot!
Focus on good controlled touch to realize the full potential of juggling. If a player does not have enough body control, this will lead to bad touches.
Be able to control the ball in different situations. So if a player has a bad touch, they should try to recover it rather than starting over.
Be able to maintain good body position.
Find rhythm and harmony between the player and the ball.
Practice while standing still, then progress to walking slowly and then with some pressure by either time or opponents.
Practice juggling about 20 minutes each day.
Encourage players to juggle, and watch the player's touch improve ten-fold.

Juggling Progression 
Start with one touch with your right foot and catch it. Repeat this 50 times until you are consistently knocking the ball to your hands. Repeat 50 touches with your left foot and catch it.
Juggle twice on your right foot and catch it. Repeat this until you are consistently knocking the ball back to the same spot. Repeat with your left foot.
Switch feet while juggling. Start juggling on your right foot and switch to your left foot, then catch it. Then start juggling on your left foot and switch it to your right foot, and catch it.
Perform the progression above with your thighs.
Keys to Proper Juggling
Once you have perfected the progression above, it is time to free juggle with your feet and thighs. Remember some of the keys to proper juggling:

Toe curled up
Locked ankle
Put a backspin on the ball
Knees slightly bent
Head slightly leaning over ball
Ready to react quickly
Consistent touch on the ball
Alternate feet and thighs
Now all that is left is to practice juggling. So, now that you know how to juggle, go practice it.
Soccer Drill Titled: How to Juggle a Soccer Ball
Tagged: Learn How to Juggle a Soccer Ball
Published by: Chris Johnson
