Jumpstyle
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Jumpstyle
Stylistic origins	
Mákinagabberhardstylehardcore technotech tranceindustrialtechno
Cultural origins	Early 2000s in Belgium and Netherlands
Fusion genres
Melbourne bounce
Regional scenes
BelgiumNetherlandsIrelandGermanyUnited KingdomRussiaPolandFranceDenmarkAustraliaLuxembourg
Other topics
Electronic musical instrumentcomputer music
Jumpstyle is an electronic dance style and music genre popular in Western Europe, with existent scenes in Eastern Europe, Australia, and the Americas.

Jumpstyling is often referred to as "Jumpen": a combination of the English word 'Jump' and the Dutch and German suffix '-en' (meaning "to jump", or "jumping").[1]

It originated in Belgium[2] but gathered bigger popularity in their neighbouring country the Netherlands in the 2000s.


Contents
1	History
2	Tournaments and leagues
3	Music
4	References
History

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Jumpstyle, originally known simply as jump, was created in Belgium. It was a short-lived small genre that did not gain popularity in its original form. However, it came back to the public during the turn of the century, and fandom began increasing throughout Europe after undergoing significant changes in Germany in early 2003.

After acquiring its current name, jumpstyle was reintroduced in Europe and in 2005 saw artists and groups producing and releasing its music.

The first key stage of its popularity came between 2007 and 2008 due to the success of music videos such as Scooter's "The Question Is What Is The Question?" and "Jumping All Over the World", which led to their 13th studio album reaching number 1 in the UK charts. However, there are still some radio stations left, broadcasting jump in its traditional form. The oldest jumpstyle radio was founded in 2005 and still exists today under the name of JumpStation.FM.[3]

The style has also been fused with other genres, for example, Major Lazer and The Partysquad mixed a unique track with a jungle vocal sample in the track "Original Don", with jumpstyle/hardstyle influences. Also, Joel Fletcher's remix of Savage's 2005 single "Swing" uses jumpstyle influences.

Tournaments and leagues
There are various jumpstyle leagues across the world; mostly in the form of online video submissions and internet competitions. However, in Belgium there have been staged tournaments such as the European Jump Masters.

The UK was the first to officially establish online leagues to an international level, with the FIJL (First International Jumpstyle League), but support was lacking, and many competitors pulled out, leaving much confusion.

On the upside, this sparked several International Leagues in countries such as Australia, Russia, Germany and Spain.[4]

Music
Jumpstyle music is an offspring of tech-trance, hardstyle, gabber and mákina. Its tempo is usually between 140 and 150 BPM. However, it cannot be seen as merely a slowed down version of gabber. It is characterised by a 909 kick drum used in a four on the floor beat. It also has influences from hard house and electro house. Starting around 2002–03, jumpstyle began to gain influence from hardstyle sound, such as pitched basslines set at a melody, more complex, multiband distortion, and synthesizers utilising square waveforms.[5]

References
 "Jumpstyle Info". USA Jumpstyle. Archived from the original on 12 August 2008. Retrieved 7 September 2008.
 "What Is It? Jumpstyle". XLR8R. 29 January 2008. Retrieved 1 February 2014.
 "First French Tek / Hardtechno / Jump Radio". JumpStation.FM. 28 August 2011. Archived from the original on 3 August 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2014.
 "International Jumpstyle Leagues" (in Dutch). Jumpstylers.ru. Retrieved 2 August 2012.
 "Over Jumpen (about Jump)" (in Dutch). Jumpisthestyle.com. Retrieved 2 November 2008.