How to Make a Sandwich
Download Article
METHODS
1Making Meat Sandwiches
2Making a Basic Sandwich
3Trying Vegetarian Sandwiches
OTHER SECTIONS
Questions & Answers
VideoWATCH NOW
Related Articles
References
Article Summary
Co-authored by wikiHow Staff
Last Updated: April 29, 2021 References Tested

A sandwich is a quick meal that you can make easily with a variety of ingredients you have around your home. Sandwiches usually consist of meat, cheese, vegetables, and condiments in between 2 slices of bread. You can experiment with different ingredients in your sandwich or you can follow a recipe to make a well-known classic. Once you make your sandwich, enjoy it hot or cold with your favorite side!

Method
1
Making Meat SandwichesDownload Article
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 81
Use sliced meat and cheese for a classic lunch sandwich. Cold cut deli meat and cheese is standard in a lot of simple sandwiches since they’re easy to assemble. Try different deli meats, such as ham, turkey, or roast beef, to see what you like the best and layer a few slices on your bread. Then pick your favorite type of cheese to put on top of the meat. Spread mayonnaise or mustard on one of your bread slices and assemble your sandwich.[1]
Some classic combinations you can try are ham or turkey with Swiss cheese, or roast beef and Cheddar.
Toast the sandwich if you want to melt the cheese and heat the meat.
Layer multiple slices of meat, cheese, toast, and vegetables to make a club sandwich.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 92
Try a BLT for a tasty toasted sandwich. Cook 3-4 strips of bacon in a frying pan or in your oven until they’re crispy and set them on a paper towel to absorb some of the grease. Lightly toast your bread so it’s golden brown and crunchy. Place bacon, tomato, and lettuce on top one of the bread slices and put mayo on the top slice of your sandwich to finish your BLT.[2]
Include avocado slices or use turkey bacon if you want to make your sandwich healthier.
Try different kinds of bacon, such as maple-infused or hickory smoked, to change the flavor of your BLT.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 103
Make a sandwich with egg and bacon for a breakfast option. Start by cooking the bacon in a frying pan or in your oven until the strips are crispy. Either fry your eggs or scramble them so it’s easier to put on your sandwich. Toast your bread and layer the bacon and eggs on the bottom. Top your sandwich with cheese and mayonnaise to finish it so you can enjoy breakfast.[3]
Put vegetables, like tomatoes, onions, or peppers, in your eggs to make your sandwich have a fresh flavor.
Use a biscuit or an English muffin instead of bread if you want your sandwich to feel more like a breakfast meal.
Try turkey bacon or use only the egg whites if you want to make your breakfast sandwich healthier.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 114
Have a reuben for a salty and tangy sandwich. Cut 2 slices of rye or pumpernickel bread and spread butter on them. Set one of the slices buttered side down in a pan, and layer slices of corned beef and Swiss cheese on top of the slice. Spread sauerkraut and Russian dressing on top of the meat and cheese before topping it with the other slice of bread. Heat the sandwich over medium-low heat and flip it over when one side gets crispy.[4]
Compress the sandwich with another skillet while it’s cooking to flatten it and make it easier to eat.
Try having reubens with different meats, like roast beef or chicken, if you want to experiment with flavors.
Include pickles on your reuben if you want another sour, tangy flavor to go with the sauerkraut.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 125
Cook a tuna melt for a delicious fish sandwich. Drain a can of tuna so it doesn’t have any liquid left. Mix the tuna with mayonnaise, salt, and pepper to give it some flavor before spreading it onto your slices of bread. Include slices of your favorite cheese and vegetables before toasting the bread in a pan over medium-low heat. Flip the sandwich once it’s golden brown on one side and let it finish cooking.[5]
Mix hot sauce into your tuna if you want to make your sandwich spicier.
Chop onions and peppers to mix in with your tuna if you want to add crunch to your sandwich.
Did you make this recipe?
Leave a review
Method
2
Making a Basic SandwichDownload Article
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 11
Choose your favorite type of bread for the sandwich. Any type of bread will work for your sandwich, so pick the one that you like the most. If you want something healthier, look for whole grain or multigrain to get helpful nutrients and fibers. You can either used pre-sliced bread or buy an entire loaf to cut your own. Use 2 slices of the bread you choose and lay them flat on your plate so you can easily build your sandwich on top of them.[6]
Look for different types of bread, like sourdough, pumpernickel, or rye, to see how they affect the overall flavor of your sandwich.
If you want to make a large sub sandwich, cut a baguette horizontally down the middle to use as the top and bottom pieces.
Try using buns or rolls instead of sliced bread if you want to make smaller sandwiches.
Look for pitas or tortillas if you’d rather have a wrap.


2
Spread your condiments directly onto the bread. Try condiments like mayonnaise, mustard, ketchup, or a dressing to add more flavor to your sandwich. Spread a thin layer of the condiments on the bread with a knife so they cover the entire slice. Be careful not to use too much of a condiment or else it will drip out or spill easily when you try to eat the sandwich. You can put the condiments on both slices of bread or just one depending on how much you want to use.[7]
Experiment with different condiments to find new sandwich flavors. For example, you may use pesto, hummus, or Greek yogurt instead of a standard condiment.
You can also put a condiment directly on another component of your sandwich if you want the flavors to interact. For example, you may put hot sauce directly on meat to make it spicier.
Condiments can make your bread a little soggy if you let them sit for too long before eating your sandwich. If you don’t want your bread to get wet, then eat your sandwich as soon as you make it or toast the bread first.


3
Put meats and cheeses on the bottom of the sandwich. Choose one of the bread slices to use as the bottom for your sandwich so you can start assembling it. Start layering thin slices of meat or cheese on the bottom slice bread so they’re less likely to slip out while you’re eating it. Look for low-sodium or low-calorie options if you want to make your sandwich healthier. Use at least 2-4 slices of meat and 1 piece of cheese so the bread isn’t the dominant flavor.[8]
Common sandwich deli meats include turkey, ham, roast beef, or bologna.
Try different types of cheeses with your sandwich. Common choices are Swiss, American, Cheddar, Muenster, and Provolone.
You can also use whole pieces of meat, like chicken breast or piece of steak, to make a heartier sandwich.
If you’re not using meat in your sandwich, then put heavier vegetables on the bottom, such as cucumbers or tomatoes.


4
Add vegetables to your sandwich to add more texture. Classic sandwich vegetables include lettuce, tomato, and onions, but you can include whatever you want when you make your own. Layer the vegetables on top of the meat and cheese, keeping the heavier vegetables near the bottom and the lighter ones at the top. Try to include at least 1-2 vegetables in your sandwich so you can have a healthy meal and so you have different textures when you bite into it.[9]
If you want to add leafy greens, try using lettuce, spinach, arugula, or basil.
Add tomatoes, onions, and peppers to add fresh flavors to your sandwich. You can either sauté the vegetables or leave them raw.
Put avocado slices or alfalfa sprouts for different textures and flavors.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 55
Season the sandwich to enhance the flavor. Shake a small amount of salt and pepper onto the sandwich to make it taste better. Try different spices or herbs you may have, like basil, oregano, or cayenne pepper, if you want to give your sandwich an additional kick. Only use a tiny pinch of each spice so the flavors aren’t too overwhelming.[10]
You can use fresh herbs in place of lettuce if you want your flavors to be more prominent.


6
Toast the sandwich if you want it hot or crunchy. Heating up your sandwich can help make the bread crispy and make it more enjoyable to eat. Place your sandwich on a baking sheet and place it in an oven preheated to 400 °F (204 °C) until the cheese is melted or the bread is golden brown. Take the sandwich out of the oven and put the slice of bread on top to finish your sandwich.[11]
You can also toast your sandwich in a pan over medium-low heat. Be sure to spray the pan with cooking oil or butter so the bread doesn’t burn.
If you want to toast your bread, wait to put on vegetables like lettuce or tomatoes so you can have a fresh flavor.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 77
Cut your sandwich so it’s easier for you to eat. Once your sandwich is completely assembled, press down on the top piece of bread to compress the sandwich so it’s easier to cut. Use a serrated knife to cut through the sandwich so it doesn’t fall apart. You can either cut the sandwich diagonally or into rectangles depending on what you prefer. After you cut the sandwich, eat it and enjoy your meal![12]
You don’t need to cut the sandwich if you don’t want to.
If you want to save some of your sandwich for later, wrap it in foil or a plastic bag and keep it in the fridge to preserve it.
Did you make this recipe?
Leave a review
Method
3
Trying Vegetarian SandwichesDownload Article
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 131
Make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich for a simple meal. Choose chunky or creamy peanut butter depending on what you prefer, and spread a thin layer of it on a slice of your bread. Then pick your favorite type of jelly and spread it on the other slice of bread. Assemble the sandwich and serve it.[13]
Use jam or preserves if you want actual fruit pieces in your sandwich.
Try adding additional ingredients, like hazelnut spread or cut bananas, to add more flavor to your sandwich.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 142
Enjoy a grilled cheese if you want a classic sandwich. Choose a slice of your favorite cheese and place it between 2 slices of bread. Butter the outsides of the bread slices and put it on a pan over medium-low heat. Flip the sandwich once it’s golden brown on one side and let the cheese melt completely before serving it.[14]
Serve your grilled cheese with tomato soup so you can dip your sandwich.
Make a tomato and mozzarella sandwich for an Italian-style grilled cheese.
Include vegetables, like onions, peppers, or tomatoes, to make your sandwich healthier.
Put apples on your grilled cheese for a sweet and savory sandwich.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 153
Have a California veggie sandwich for a healthy, loaded option. Spread a thin layer of mashed avocado on one of the slices of bread to start. Layer vegetables like sliced cucumbers, lettuce, tomatoes, onions, and shredded carrots to add as many flavors as you want. Top your sandwich with Greek yogurt or goat cheese to add a different flavor to the sandwich before serving it.[15]
Use pickled vegetables to add a sour flavor and a crunch when you bite into it.
If you want to have a creamy, earthy flavor on your sandwich, try spreading goat cheese on one of the bread slices.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 164
Eat an egg salad sandwich for a rich flavor. Chop hard-boiled eggs into small cubes and mix them with mayonnaise, lemon juice, mustard, green onions, and celery. Season your egg salad with salt, pepper, and any other spices you want before chilling it in your fridge for 1 hour. Put the egg salad on your slices of bread and top it with lettuce to finish your sandwich.[16]
Try the egg salad in a lettuce wrap if you want a low-carb meal.
Mix cayenne pepper and paprika in your egg salad if you want to give it a kick.
Image titled Make a Sandwich Step 175
Make a hummus pita for a Mediterranian-style sandwich. Toss shredded carrots, radishes, and red onion in a bowl with parsley, lemon juice, and olive oil to dress the vegetables. Open a slice of pita bread and spread hummus on the inside before putting some of your vegetable mixture in. Add chopped tomatoes, avocado slices, and other herbs into the pita to finish your sandwich.[17]
You can buy pita pockets to make it easier to enjoy your sandwich.
Try different flavors of hummus to change how your sandwich tastes.