Foot massage techniques and benefits
12 foot massage techniques
Benefits
Foot massage vs. reflexology
Foot massage tips
Risks and considerations
Summary
At the end of a long day, many people enjoy giving or receiving a foot massage. Foot massage can aid relaxation and may relieve muscle aches.

There are many ways to massage feet that are easy to try at home. This article gives step-by-step instructions for 12 foot massage techniques.

Read on to find out how to massage feet.

12 foot massage techniques
Here are 12 foot massage techniques that a person can use on themselves or another person:

1. Warmup twists
Warmup twists are one way to start a foot massage. To use this technique:

place the palms on either side of the foot
gently pull the right side of the foot forward while pushing the left side back
push the left side of the foot back while pulling the right side forward
repeat this twisting motion, working the hands from the ankle to the toes
The gentle twisting motion helps warm up the foot in preparation for further massage.

2. Arch rubs
People can use arch rubs to massage the underside of the foot. To use this technique:

hold the top of the foot in one hand
with the fingers of the other hand, rub the length of the arch
do this repeatedly, from the heel to the ball of the foot
3. Toe bends
Toe bends may encourage flexibility in the foot. To use this foot massage technique:

hold the heel with one hand
bend all the toes on one foot back and forth at the same time with the other hand
repeat this movement, gently increasing pressure and flexing the toes to their full range of motion
4. Foot spread
Food spreading may help the foot expand to its natural width. To use this foot massage technique:

hold each side of the foot
pull each side of the foot outward
repeat this motion, allowing the foot to spread
5. Heel squeeze
Heel squeezes may help relieve tension at the back of the foot. To use this technique:

hold the top of the foot in one hand
hold the back of the heel in the other
repeatedly squeeze and release the back of the heel
6. Knuckle or fist work
Knuckle or fist work is a way to massage the bottom of the foot. To use this technique:

hold the back of the foot with one hand
hold a knuckle or full fist on the other hand against the bottom of the foot
use the knuckle or fist to knead the bottom of the foot, using moderate pressure
repeat this motion, working down the ball of the foot to the heel
7. Thumb work
Thumb work is another foot massage technique that a person can practice on the bottom of the foot. To use this technique:

hold the foot with one hand on either side
place the fingers on the top of the foot
place the thumbs under each foot, on the toe pads
use the thumbs to stroke down each toe, using moderate pressure
move to the ball of the foot, repeating the downward stroke motion with the thumbs
repeat this motion in the arch of the feet and the heel
continue for as long as it is enjoyable
8. Pressure points
Pressing points on the instep is another relaxing foot massage technique. To use this technique:

use one hand to support the top of the foot
use the thumb of the other hand to press and release the top of the instep
gradually move down the instep, repeating this pressing motion
continue pressing and releasing, down to the back of the heel
9. Achilles massage
Achilles massage may help relieve pressure on the Achilles tendon. To use this foot massage technique:

grasp the Achilles tendon with the other hand, between the thumb and index finger
use a stroking motion down toward the heel
repeat this several times
10. Top and side circles
Top and side circling is a simple foot massage technique. To use it:

using both hands, support the foot from below
extend the fingers and use them to make circles around the ankle on either side
using a continuous circular movement, move the fingers around the side of the foot
keep circling the fingers, continuing up to the toes
pay attention to the space between each tendon
11. Toe massage
Toe massage may help relieve tension and cramps in the toes. To use this foot massage technique:

hold the base of the foot with one hand
with the fingers of the other hand, tug, twist, and pull each toe gently
move from the outer to the inner toes
repeat several times
massage between each toe
12. Finishing strokes
People can use finishing strokes at the end of a foot massage. To use this technique:

place the palms on either side of the foot
gently pull the right side of the foot forward while pushing the left side back
then push the left side of the foot back while pushing the right side forward
repeat this twisting motion, working the hands from the ankle to the toes
lighten the pressure each time, gradually lifting the hands from the foot completely
Benefits
There is growing scientific evidence for the health benefits of massage.

A 2010 studyTrusted Source found that when integrated into acute care, massage therapy may help a person:

deal with physical and mental health challenges
experience less pain
relax
manage emotions
sleep
Research from 2018 found that the use of hand and foot massage in clinical settings can reduce anxiety and improve vital signs for patients.

Also, a 2016 review suggested that healthcare professionals recommend massage therapy over no treatment as a pain management option.

Foot massage vs. reflexology
Reflexology is an alternative therapy that involves putting pressure on specific parts of the foot. It is not the same as a regular foot massage.

Advocates of reflexology believe that putting pressure on the foot can heal unrelated problems elsewhere in the body.

There is anecdotal evidence that reflexology can be soothing, but researchers noteTrusted Source that many systematic reviews have found little strong evidence to support its effectiveness.

Even if scientific evidence does not support reflexology, the practice can be relaxing, as it is a form of foot massage.

Foot massage tips
There is no one way to carry out a foot massage. Different people prefer different techniques. A person may want to test many techniques and learn what feels good for them or someone else.

Before getting started:

soak the feet in warm water, with or without a few drops of diluted essential oil
pat the feet dry with a towel
rest the feet on the towel
spread massage oil over the foot, up to the ankle
Here are some general foot massage tips to use as a guide:

Pay attention to parts that feel sore: Work on sore areas for longer, with as much or as little pressure as feels comfortable.
Pay attention to parts that feel good: If it is enjoyable, a person can continue.
Avoid injuring the thumbs: Do not use so much pressure that the thumbs start to hurt. Use the strength of body weight, not muscles in thumbs, to apply pressure.
Avoid using pressure that is too light, as this may tickle.
Focus on one foot at a time.
