How to Open a Beer Bottle Without a Bottle Opener
Friends clinking bottles of beer
4
George Rudy / Shutterstock
by Terron Moore
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)
Men’s Journal aims to feature only the best products and services. We update when possible, but deals expire and prices can change. If you buy something via one of our links, we may earn a commission.
Questions? Reach us at shop@mensjournal.com.
Sponsored content

Is there anything more inconvenient than not being able to open a beer? Think about it. How frustrating is it to be watching a nail-biting game or chatting someone up at a party, then being distracted by something as silly as not having a bottle opener for your favorite brew?

 

This could potentially be a make-or-break moment, so we’ve found six of the smoothest, most effective ways you can open a beer without an opener, all without losing your cool. Keep the good times rolling with these hacks.

The 101 Best Beers in America
The 101 Best Beers in America
READ ARTICLE
Any available edge or countertop
Just place one edge of the bottle cap on top of the table, hold the neck of the bottle tight, and use your other hand to slam down on the bottle. It may take a few taps, but if you’re a pro, the cap will pop off on your first try. (Steer clear of using someone’s kitchen counter or table, though…)

A dollar bill
Fold a dollar bill in half vertically and roll it up as tightly as possible. Fold it in half again and believe it or not, the bent edge should be strong and sturdy enough to pop open a bottle. With your dominant hand, place the bent buck under the cap and push upward, which will release the top.

A lighter
If you have a basic one handy, grab the bottleneck with just enough space to fit the lighter between the top of your index finger and the bottom of the cap. With your other hand, push the free side of the lighter down, which should make the top fly right off.

The 10 Coolest Places in America to Drink Craft Beer
The 10 Coolest Places in America to Drink Craft Beer
READ ARTICLE
A ring
You don’t even have to dig around for this one, and if you do it quick and effectively enough, you’ll never need an opener again in life. With your hand over the bottle, place the underside of your ring right under the bottle cap, tilt the bottle 45 degrees, grip the top and pull back.

A key
This one is a little more involved, but still gets the job done: Hold the beer with your non-dominant hand and use the other to place the long side of the key under the cap. Twist the key upward to loosen part of the cap, turn the bottle, and repeat until the cap is loose enough for you to slip the point of the key under and release the top.

A belt buckle
Many belts these days come with built-in bottle openers, but in case you’ve graduated from your chugging frat days, any sturdy belt buckle should do the trick. Removing the belt from your pants, just place one edge of the buckle under the cap and use your thumb to push down on the other side of the buckle with enough force to release the cap.

A door
If you can’t find a handy opener inside your home, just stroll to the nearest door and open it up. Find the door strike—the metal plate surrounding the hole where the latch is inserted—and wedge a tilted bottle inside. Gently tug the bottle backward and soon it’ll be drinking time.

A fork or spoon
The silverware drawer contains several bottle-opening hacks. First, take a fork and stick a single tine beneath the cap, working back and forth until you remove it. Also, you can use a spoon. Grip the bottle’s neck with one hand, then pick up a spoon with your other hand, positioning your thumb and pointer finger around the spoon’s base. Stick the spoon’s lip beneath the cap and use leverage to pry it off.

A flathead screwdriver or claw hammer
Pull out your tool chest and you’re halfway to opening any bottled IPA. Place the business end of a flathead screwdriver beneath a cap’s lip, then use leverage to loosen the cap until it comes off. A claw hammer also works as well. Turn it upside down and position one of forks beneath the cap, then lift until you can take off the cap.

