How to Learn to Play the Organ
Download Article
PARTS
1Learning the Piano
2Gathering Everything You Will Need
3Studying the Organ
OTHER SECTIONS
Questions & Answers
Tips and Warnings
Related Articles
References
Article Summary
Co-authored by wikiHow Staff
Last Updated: May 28, 2021 Approved

One of the most interesting and fascinating instruments to play is the organ. The organ has been called "The King of Instruments" due to its ability to produce sounds across wide ranges of both volume and pitch. There are many variations of this instrument: from the standard electronic, to the more refined Church Organ, Orchestral Organ, Theatre Pipe Organ, or even the Cathedral Organ. They can have as few as one keyboard (manuals) to as many as seven. Learning the organ can seem difficult but also extremely rewarding, as the musical variety they are capable of is astounding. By starting with the piano, obtaining the right materials, and finally, studying the organ, you will be on your way to organ success.

Part
1
Learning the PianoDownload Article
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 1
1
Learn about the keyboard. Before you can learn to play the organ, you must have some experience on the piano. In fact, many organ teachers will not accept you without at least one year of piano training. Begin your journey by learning about the keyboard on the piano. You must first understand what the various keys do, and which notes they can produce.
The keyboard of a piano repeats its notes from top to bottom across several octaves. This means that the notes change from low (left side) to high (right side), but don't vary in pitch.
There are twelve notes a piano can produce: seven white key notes (C, D, E, F, G, A, B) and five black key notes (C-sharp, D-sharp, F-sharp, A-flat, and B-flat).
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 2
2
Play scales. Playing scales (a series of notes) is the cornerstone of mastering piano technique. Learn some basic piano scales, starting with simple two-finger scales and then advancing to three-finger scales. Practice your piano scales every day.
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 3
3
Learn to read music. As organ is considered an advanced instrument, most teachers will expect you to be able to read sheet music before you begin organ study. Learning to read music can be challenging at first, but it is a crucial skill for mastering any musical instrument, including piano and organ.
Learn about the treble clef.
Move on to the bass clef.
Learn about the parts of the note (the note head, the stem, the flag).
Learn about meter and rhythm.
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 4
4
Practice using your hands independently. Once you have become comfortable with piano scales, and perhaps started playing some simple compositions, you must learn to use each of your hands independently. Eventually, you must be able to play two different movements (one with each hand) at the same time. This simultaneous playing must be mastered before you can advance to organ play.
Part
2
Gathering Everything You Will NeedDownload Article
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 5
1
Find an organ teacher. Inquire at local churches, colleges, or music shops. Many colleges have undergraduate programs in applied organ, and music theory in general. You can also check organ-related periodicals for teachers. But the best way is to contact your local chapter of The American Guild of Organists, and search for a teacher through them. If you choose to talk to a local Church Organist, make sure that they are well-qualified to teach.[1]
When you make contact with a teacher, be sure to find out if you meet their minimum requirements to begin lessons (for example, ability to sight read and/or a certain level of experience on the piano).
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 6
2
Gain access to an organ. In order to learn the organ, you will need to practice outside of your lessons. An organ is a large and expensive instrument, so before you can begin serious organ study, you must ensure that you have access to a practice instrument. Speak to your instructor about the possibility of practicing at the studio, inquire at local churches, or obtain a small (or digital) organ for home.
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 7
3
Purchase an introductory level organ book. An introduction to organ book will help you to study the basics alongside what you learn during your lessons. Most music stores will carry such a book. Speak to your organ instructor about a book they recommends to work well alongside their teaching.
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 8
4
Buy a pair of organ shoes. Pedals are a unique aspect of organ playing, and having the proper footwear will help you develop efficient technique. Additionally, since you will only be wearing your organ shoes when sitting at the organ, they will not pick up dirt or grime which can damage the pedals.[2]
You can purchase them online for around sixty dollars.
Some instructors may require you to have proper organ shoes before you can play on their organ.
Part
3
Studying the OrganDownload Article
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 9
1
Begin taking lessons. The organ is a difficult instrument. As such, you will benefit greatly from professional instruction. Once you have located a teacher in your area, create a regular schedule of lessons (such as, twice a week). Find out if there is anything you must bring with you to each lesson. Organize your other life obligations so that they do not conflict with your lesson times.[3]
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 10
2
Study pedal technique. The primary difference between piano and organ is the introduction of a third voice, by way of the foot pedals. To play organ, you must practice proper pedal form and technique. Work to keep your heels together at all times. Additionally, your knees should also be touching. Finally, play on the inside of your foot, which means turning your ankle in.
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 11
3
Practice legato playing. With the organ, you do not want there to be any space between notes. You likewise do not want to the notes to overlap. This is known as “legato playing.” Legato playing also involves a technique called “trapping the note.” This means holding a key down with one finger so that you can advance to another key (note) with a different finger. For example, if you initially press a key down with your first finger, you may need to use your thumb to keep that key down, so that your first finger can advance to another key. Work your way across the keyboard and back to master this technique and achieve a legato effect.[4]
Begin practicing legato playing using only the white keys. Once you feel comfortable with this, work to incorporate the black keys.
When you feel comfortable playing legato with your hands, advance to practicing your legato playing with both hands and feet.
Image titled Learn to Play the Organ Step 12
4
Practice! There is only one way to master any instrument: practice, practice, practice. Create a daily practice schedule for yourself and stick with it. The more practice you can put in, the more you will get out of it.