How to Play the Accordion
Download Article
PARTS
1Getting To Know Your Accordion
2Holding Your Accordion
3Playing Your Accordion
OTHER SECTIONS
Questions & Answers
Tips and Warnings
Related Articles
References
Article Summary
Author Info
Last Updated: May 28, 2021 References Approved

You might think that playing the accordion requires extensive knowledge of musical notation. But guess what? It actually doesn't. So if you're a beginner, and would like to find out more about how to play the accordion, read on to find out helpful tips.

Part
1
Getting To Know Your AccordionDownload Article
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 1
1
Get the right kind of accordion. There are variety of different accordions out there, but some are more well-suited for beginners than others. The more information you gather the better equipped you will be to successfully learn to play the accordion. Here is the most suitable option for beginners[1] :
Piano Accordions. These are the most popular kinds, with many of the capabilities of a regular piano (playing melodies, chords and basslines) in a highly portable size. They have between 25 and 45 piano-style treble keys on the right hand. On the left, they are equipped with a button keyboard with some buttons that play bass notes and some where a single button plays a three-note chord. This accordion system is called the Stradella, and typically has 120 bass buttons.
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 2
2
Familiarize yourself with the instrument's structure. Your accordion is composed of several parts, all crucial to the accordion's sounds[2] :
Melody Keys. These are keys on the keyboard part of the instrument.
Bellows. These are the folds on the instrument that allow it to expand and contract, acting as the "lungs" for the instrument and creating the sound.
Register Switches. These are buttons or tabs you press to change the tone of your accordion.There are usually register switches on the treble side for the piano keyboard and a second set for the bass buttons. The register switches can change the sound from deep and rich to high and thin.
Air Valve. The air valve button allows air to escape, so you can open or close the bellows soundlessly.
Right Hand Strap. This is the main strap of the instrument that allows you to secure it onto your chest. Some accordions have two straps for the chest.
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 3
3
Use the right size. Children and teens or adults will need to start off with different sizes due to the difference in hand and general body size[3] .
Children should start with the lowest number of bass buttons, 12 bass and 25 treble keys.
Teens and adults should start with a 48 bass accordion. This amounts to 48 bass buttons and 26 treble piano keys.
The 48 bass Piano Accordion is very lightweight, and easy to use and handle. Plus, you can play lots of different music on it, which will make you want to hang on to it even if you outgrow it or progress to a larger instrument.
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 4
4
Place your accordion on your chest with the key buttons facing away from you. When you begin handling your instrument in the next section of the article, your left arm will move horizontally and vertically, while your right hand will only move vertically. For now, just hold it and see how comfortable or uncomfortable it is.
Score
0 / 3
Part 1 Quiz

How should a beginner accordion player choose their instrument?

All beginner instruments are the same and they should start there.
By picking an instrument that is appropriate to their size and age.
By starting with a piano accordion and moving onto more difficult instruments from there.
Part
2
Holding Your AccordionDownload Article
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 5
1
Sit or stand while holding your accordion. Some people prefer to stand while playing and others like to sit with their instrument. All that matters is your sense of comfort and confidence, so try out a few different positions until you feel at ease.
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 6
2
Don't slouch. Your body posture is very important when playing this instrument and slouching will cause you to be inaccurate in your balance and consequently in your performance.
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 7
3
Learn proper balance. The accordion is relatively large and requires a little bit of familiarity when holding it. Being able to maintain proper balance is crucial. The more evenly balanced you manage to keep the accordion's weight, the better you'll be able to play because of the added control. And the more control you have, the less uncomfortable the weight will feel.
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 8
4
Secure the instrument onto your chest. Slip your left arm under the strap of the instrument. You'll want to hold it as if you were putting on a backpack on your chest. The piano keys should be to your right and your left hand goes underneath the bass strap - the small strap on the left side of the instrument[4] .
Note that there is usually a thumb wheel on the left side to adjust the strap.
Make sure that your accordion fits tightly enough not to move at all while you move.
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 9
5
Try a back strap. An additional strap can be very useful. The back strap keeps the shoulder straps together so that the accordion doesn't move.
Note that if the back strap is too far down it alleviates weight from the shoulders, making the straps loose on top. This, in turn, causes your straps to move and slide.
Keep the back strap higher up, or secure it diagonally.
Remember that when the straps stay in place, so does your instrument.
Image titled Play the Accordion Step 10
6
Undo the safety buckles. The buckles can be found on the top and bottom of the instrument. Take care not to push or pull the accordion yet.