Bagpipes
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about the general form of bagpipes. For specific types of bagpipe, see List of bagpipes.

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Bagpipes" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Bagpipes
Gaiteros Galicia.jpg
Bagpipers from Galicia, Spain
Woodwind instrument
Classification	
Aerophone
Wind
Woodwind
Hornbostel–Sachs classification	422.112
(Reed aerophone with conical bore)
Related instruments
Oboe
Shawm
Bassoon
Musicians
List of bagpipers
Bagpipes are a woodwind instrument using enclosed reeds fed from a constant reservoir of air in the form of a bag. The Scottish Great Highland bagpipes are the best known examples in the Anglophone world, but people have played bagpipes for centuries throughout large parts of Europe, Northern Africa, Western Asia, around the Persian Gulf and northern parts of South Asia.

The term bagpipe is equally correct in the singular or the plural, though pipers usually refer to the bagpipes as "the pipes", "a set of pipes" or "a stand of pipes".


Contents
1	Construction
1.1	Air supply
1.2	Bag
1.3	Chanter
1.3.1	Chanter reed
1.4	Drone
2	History
2.1	Possible ancient origins
2.2	Spread and development in Europe
2.3	Recent history
3	Modern usage
3.1	Types of bagpipes
3.1.1	Image gallery
3.2	Usage in non-traditional music
4	Publications
4.1	Periodicals
4.2	Books
5	See also
6	References
7	External links
Construction

Skye Boat Song
MENU0:00
An adaptation of the "Skye Boat Song" for Great Highland bagpipes played by the Clan Stewart Pipe Band.
Problems playing this file? See media help.

A detail from the Cantigas de Santa Maria showing bagpipes with one chanter and a parallel drone (Spain, 13th century).

A detail from a painting by Hieronymus Bosch showing two bagpipers (15th century).
A set of bagpipes minimally consists of an air supply, a bag, a chanter, and usually at least one drone. Many bagpipes have more than one drone (and, sometimes, more than one chanter) in various combinations, held in place in stocks—sockets that fasten the various pipes to the bag.

Air supply
The most common method of supplying air to the bag is through blowing into a blowpipe or blowstick. In some pipes the player must cover the tip of the blowpipe with their tongue while inhaling, but most blowpipes have a non-return valve that eliminates this need. In recent times, there are many instruments that assist in creating a clean air flow to the pipes and assist the collection of condensation.

An innovation, dating from the 16th or 17th century, is the use of a bellows to supply air. In these pipes, sometimes called "cauld wind pipes", air is not heated or moistened by the player's breathing, so bellows-driven bagpipes can use more refined or delicate reeds. Such pipes include the Irish uilleann pipes; the border or Lowland pipes, Scottish smallpipes, Northumbrian smallpipes, pastoral pipes in Britain; and the musette de cour, the musette bechonnet and the cabrette in France, the Dudy wielkopolskie, koziol bialy and koziol czarny in Poland.

Bag
The bag is an airtight reservoir that holds air and regulates its flow via arm pressure, allowing the player to maintain continuous even sound. The player keeps the bag inflated by blowing air into it through a blowpipe or pumping air into it with a bellows. Materials used for bags vary widely, but the most common are the skins of local animals such as goats, dogs, sheep, and cows. More recently, bags made of synthetic materials including Gore-Tex have become much more common. A drawback of the synthetic bag is the potential for fungal spores to colonise the bag because of a reduction in necessary cleaning, with the associated danger of lung infection.[1] An advantage of a synthetic bag is that it has a zip which allows the user to fit a more effective moisture trap to the inside of the bag.

Bags cut from larger materials are usually saddle-stitched with an extra strip folded over the seam and stitched (for skin bags) or glued (for synthetic bags) to reduce leaks. Holes are then cut to accommodate the stocks. In the case of bags made from largely intact animal skins, the stocks are typically tied into the points where the limbs and the head joined the body of the whole animal, a construction technique common in Central Europe.

Chanter
Main article: Chanter
The chanter is the melody pipe, played with two hands. All bagpipes have at least one chanter; some pipes have two chanters, particularly those in North Africa, in the Balkans, and in Southwest Asia. A chanter can be bored internally so that the inside walls are parallel (or "cylindrical") for its full length, or it can be bored in a conical shape.

The chanter is usually open-ended, so there is no easy way for the player to stop the pipe from sounding. Thus most bagpipes share a constant, legato sound where there are no rests in the music. Primarily because of this inability to stop playing, technical movements are used to break up notes and to create the illusion of articulation and accents. Because of their importance, these embellishments (or "ornaments") are often highly technical systems specific to each bagpipe, and take many years of study to master. A few bagpipes (such as the musette de cour, the uilleann pipes, the Northumbrian smallpipes, the piva and the left chanter of the surdelina) have closed ends or stop the end on the player's leg, so that when the player "closes" (covers all the holes) the chanter becomes silent.

A practice chanter is a chanter without bag or drones, allowing a player to practice the instrument quietly and with no variables other than playing the chanter.

The term chanter is derived from the Latin cantare, or "to sing", much like the modern French word chanteur.

Chanter reed
The note from the chanter is produced by a reed installed at its top. The reed may be a single (a reed with one vibrating tongue) or double reed (of two pieces that vibrate against each other). Double reeds are used with both conical- and parallel-bored chanters while single reeds are generally (although not exclusively) limited to parallel-bored chanters. In general, double-reed chanters are found in pipes of Western Europe while single-reed chanters appear in most other regions.

Drone
Most bagpipes have at least one drone: a pipe which is generally not fingered but rather produces a constant harmonizing note throughout play (usually the tonic note of the chanter). Exceptions are generally those pipes which have a double-chanter instead. A drone is most commonly a cylindrically-bored tube with a single reed, although drones with double reeds exist. The drone is generally designed in two or more parts with a sliding joint so that the pitch of the drone can be adjusted.

Depending on the type of pipes, the drones may lie over the shoulder, across the arm opposite the bag, or may run parallel to the chanter. Some drones have a tuning screw, which effectively alters the length of the drone by opening a hole, allowing the drone to be tuned to two or more distinct pitches. The tuning screw may also shut off the drone altogether. In most types of pipes, where there is one drone it is pitched two octaves below the tonic of the chanter. Additional drones often add the octave below and then a drone consonant with the fifth of the chanter.

History
Possible ancient origins
The evidence for bagpipes prior to the 13th century AD is still uncertain but several textual and visual clues have been suggested. The Oxford History of Music says that a sculpture of bagpipes has been found on a Hittite slab at Euyuk in Anatolia, dated to 1000 BC. Several authors identify the ancient Greek askaulos (ἀσκός askos – wine-skin, αὐλός aulos – reed pipe) with the bagpipe.[2] In the 2nd century AD, Suetonius described the Roman emperor Nero as a player of the tibia utricularis.[3] Dio Chrysostom wrote in the 1st century of a contemporary sovereign (possibly Nero) who could play a pipe (tibia, Roman reedpipes similar to Greek and Etruscan instruments) with his mouth as well as by tucking a bladder beneath his armpit.[4]

Spread and development in Europe

Medieval bagpiper at the Cistercian monastery of Santes Creus, Catalonia, Spain

Image of Irelande, Military use of the bagpipe dated 1581
In the early part of the second millennium, definite clear attestations of bagpipes began to appear with frequency in Western European art and iconography. The Cantigas de Santa Maria, written in Galician-Portuguese and compiled in Castile in the mid-13th century, depicts several types of bagpipes.[5] Several illustrations of bagpipes also appear in the Chronique dite de Baudoin d’Avesnes, a 13th-century manuscript of northern French origin.[6][7] Although evidence of bagpipes in the British Isles prior to the 14th century is contested, they are explicitly mentioned in The Canterbury Tales (written around 1380):[8]

A baggepype wel coude he blowe and sowne, /And ther-with-al he broghte us out of towne.

— Canterbury Tales
Bagpipes were also frequent subjects for carvers of wooden choir stalls in the late 15th and early 16th century throughout Europe, sometimes with animal musicians.[9]

Actual specimens of bagpipes from before the 18th century are extremely rare; however, a substantial number of paintings, carvings, engravings, manuscript illuminations, and so on survive. They make it clear that bagpipes varied hugely throughout Europe, and even within individual regions. Many examples of early folk bagpipes in continental Europe can be found in the paintings of Brueghel, Teniers, Jordaens, and Durer.[10]

The earliest known artifact that seems to definitely be part of a bagpipe is a chanter found at Rostock in 1985 which has been dated to late 14th to first quarter of the 15th century.[11]


De doedelzakspeler ("Bagpipe Player"), Hendrick ter Brugghen, 1624
The first clear reference to the use of the Scottish Highland bagpipes is from a French history, which mentions their use at the Battle of Pinkie in 1547. George Buchanan (1506–82) claimed that they had replaced the trumpet on the battlefield. This period saw the creation of the ceòl mór (great music) of the bagpipe, which reflected its martial origins, with battle-tunes, marches, gatherings, salutes and laments.[12] The Highlands of the early seventeenth century saw the development of piping families including the MacCrimmonds, MacArthurs, MacGregors and the Mackays of Gairloch.[13]

The first probable reference to the Irish bagpipe is from 1544, which mentions their use by Irish troops in Henry VIII's siege of Boulogne.[14] In 1581 The Image of Irelande clearly depicts a bagpiper. Derrick's illustrations are considered to be reasonably faithful depictions of the attire and equipment of the English and Irish population of the 16th century.[15] The "Battell" sequence from My Ladye Nevells Booke (1591) by William Byrd, which probably alludes to the Irish wars of 1578, contains a piece entitled The bagpipe: & the drone. In 1760, the first serious study of the Scottish Highland bagpipe and its music was attempted, in Joseph MacDonald's Compleat Theory. Further south, a manuscript from the 1730s by a William Dixon from Northumberland contains music that fits the border pipes, a nine-note bellows-blown bagpipe whose chanter is similar to that of the modern Great Highland bagpipe. However the music in Dixon's manuscript varied greatly from modern Highland bagpipe tunes, consisting mostly of extended variation sets of common dance tunes. Some of the tunes in the Dixon manuscript correspond to tunes found in early 19th century published and manuscript sources of Northumbrian smallpipe tunes, notably the rare book of 50 tunes, many with variations, by John Peacock.


Happy Brothers by Uroš Predić (1887)
As Western classical music developed, both in terms of musical sophistication and instrumental technology, bagpipes in many regions fell out of favour due to their limited range and function. This triggered a long, slow decline that continued, in most cases, into the 20th century.

Extensive and documented collections of traditional bagpipes can be found in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City, the International Bagpipe Museum in Gijón, Spain, the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford, England and the Morpeth Chantry Bagpipe Museum in Northumberland, and the Musical Instrument Museum in Phoenix, Arizona.


International Bagpipe Festival, Strakonice, 2018
The International Bagpipe Festival(cs) is held every two years in Strakonice, Czech Republic.

Recent history

A Canadian soldier plays the bagpipes during the War in Afghanistan. Bagpipes are frequently used during funerals and memorials, especially among fire department, military and police forces in the United Kingdom, Ireland, the Commonwealth realms, and the US.
During the expansion of the British Empire, spearheaded by British military forces that included Highland regiments, the Scottish Great Highland bagpipe became well known worldwide. This surge in popularity was boosted by large numbers of pipers trained for military service in World War I and World War II. The surge coincided with a decline in the popularity of many traditional forms of bagpipe throughout Europe, which began to be displaced by instruments from the classical tradition and later by gramophone and radio.

In the United Kingdom and Commonwealth Nations such as Canada, New Zealand and Australia the Great Highland bagpipe is commonly used in the military and is often played in formal ceremonies. Foreign militaries patterned after the British Army have also taken the Highland bagpipe into use including Uganda, Sudan, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Jordan, and Oman. Many police and fire services in Scotland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, and the United States have also adopted the tradition of fielding pipe bands.


A bagpiper busking with the Great Highland bagpipe on the street in Edinburgh, Scotland

A bagad in Brest, France
In recent years, often driven by revivals of native folk music and dance, many types of bagpipes have enjoyed a resurgence in popularity and, in many cases, instruments that had fallen into obscurity have become extremely popular. In Brittany, the Great Highland bagpipe and concept of the pipe band were appropriated to create a Breton interpretation, the bagad. The pipe band idiom has also been adopted and applied to the Galician gaita as well. Additionally, bagpipes have often been used in various films depicting moments from Scottish and Irish history; the film Braveheart and the theatrical show Riverdance have served to make the uilleann pipes more commonly known.

Bagpipes are sometimes played at formal events in Commonwealth universities, particularly in Canada. Because of the Scottish influences on the sport of curling, bagpipes are also the official instrument of the World Curling Federation and are commonly played during a ceremonial procession of teams before major curling championships.

Bagpipe making was once a craft that produced instruments in many distinctive local traditional styles. Today, the world's biggest producer of the instrument is Pakistan, where the industry was worth $6.8 million in 2010.[16][17] In the late 20th century, various models of electronic bagpipes were invented. The first custom-built MIDI bagpipes were developed by the Asturian piper known as Hevia (José Ángel Hevia Velasco).[18]

File:FIL 2016 - The City Of Auckland Pipe Band - 4780.webm
Bagpipes players from The City Of Auckland Pipe Band.
Modern usage
Types of bagpipes
Main article: List of bagpipes
Numerous types of bagpipes today are widely spread across Europe and the Middle East, as well as through much of the former British Empire. The name bagpipe has almost become synonymous with its best-known form, the Great Highland bagpipe, overshadowing the great number and variety of traditional forms of bagpipe. Despite the decline of these other types of pipes over the last few centuries, in recent years many of these pipes have seen a resurgence or revival as musicians have sought them out; for example, the Irish piping tradition, which by the mid 20th century had declined to a handful of master players is today alive, well, and flourishing a situation similar to that of the Asturian gaita, the Galician gaita, the Portuguese gaita transmontana, the Aragonese gaita de boto, Northumbrian smallpipes, the Breton biniou, the Balkan gaida, the Romanian cimpoi, the Black Sea tulum, the Scottish smallpipes and pastoral pipes, as well as other varieties.


A Great Highland bagpipe practice chanter
Traditionally, one of the purposes of the bagpipe was to provide music for dancing. This has declined with the growth of dance bands, recordings, and the decline of traditional dance. In turn, this has led to many types of pipes developing a performance-led tradition, and indeed much modern music based on the dance music tradition played on bagpipes is suitable for use as dance music.

Image gallery

Bulgarian Kaba gaida player.

 

The Scottish Great Highland bagpipe played at a Canadian military function.

 

A musician with a Northern Italian Baghèt wearing traditional dress.

 

Modern Baghèt (made 2000 by Valter Biella) in G.

 

Central and southern Italian zampogna.

 

Laz man from Turkey playing a tulum.

 

Cillian Vallely playing Irish Uilleann pipes.

 

Kathryn Tickell playing Northumbrian smallpipes.

 

Man from Skopje, North Macedonia playing the Gaida.

 

Galician gaita.

 

Sruti upanga, a Southern Indian bagpipe.

 

Hungarian duda.

 

Serbian piper.

 

Polish pipers.

 

Bagad of Lann Bihoué from the French Navy.

 

Swedish säckpipa.

 

Pastoral pipes with removable footjoint and bellows.

 

Street piper from Sofia, Bulgaria.

 

Estonian torupill player.

 

Lithuanian piper.

 

Modern German huemmelchen.

 

Lithuanian bagpipes.

 

Gaita asturiana.

 

Welsh bagpipes (double-reed type).

 

Cantabrian pipe band.

 

Syrian piper in Damascus, Syria.

 

Various forms of the Tsampouna, found in the Greek islands.

 

Belarusian piper.

 

Maltese Żaqq.

 

Piper playing by the Royal Palace of Amsterdam.

 

Romanian cimpoi player.

 
File:Ľubomír Párička gra na dudach.webm
Ľubomír Párička playing bagpipes, Slovak Republic.

 

Portuguese pipers

 

Bagpipes made in Ab Pakhsh, Iran.

 

Chanter of bagpipes from Ab Pakhsh

Usage in non-traditional music
Main article: List of nontraditional bagpipe usage

Celtic rock band Enter the Haggis featuring Highland bagpipes
Since the 1960s, bagpipes have also made appearances in other forms of music, including rock, metal, jazz, hip-hop, punk, and classical music, for example with Paul McCartney's "Mull of Kintyre", AC/DC's "It's a Long Way to the Top (If You Wanna Rock 'n' Roll)", and Peter Maxwell Davies's composition An Orkney Wedding, with Sunrise.


The bagpiper from Oberhausen Zirkus Zeitgeist Saltatio Mortis.
Publications
Periodicals
Periodicals covering specific types of bagpipes are addressed in the article for that bagpipe

An Píobaire, Dublin: Na Píobairí Uilleann.
Chanter, The Bagpipe Society.
The Piping Times, Glasgow: The College of Piping.
Piping Today, Glasgow: The National Piping Centre.
Utriculus, Italy: Circolo della Zampogna.
The Voice, Newark, DL: The Eastern United States Pipe Band Association.
Books
Baines, Anthony (Nov 1991), Woodwind Instruments and Their History, Dover Pub, ISBN 0-486-26885-3.
——— (1995), Bagpipes (3rd ed.), Pitt Rivers Museum, Univ. of Oxford, ISBN 0-902793-10-1, 147 pp. with plates.
Cheape, Hugh, The Book of the Bagpipe.
Collinson, Francis (1975), The Bagpipe, The History of a Musical Instrument.
See also
List of bagpipes
List of bagpipers
List of pipe makers
List of pipe bands
List of published bagpipe music
List of nontraditional bagpipe usage
List of composers who employed pipe music
Glossary of bagpipe terms
Practice chanter
References
 "Bagpipe warning over threat of fatal fungus – Health". The Scotsman. 2013-03-10. Retrieved 2013-08-21.
 William Flood. "The Story of the Bagpipe" p. 15
 "Life of Nero, 54", Suetonius, The Lives of the Caesars, Loeb Classical Library, p. 185, retrieved 2013-01-02
 "Discourses by Dio Chrysostom (Or. 71.9)", The Seventy-first Discourse: On the Philosopher (Volume V), Loeb Classical Library, V, p. 173, retrieved 2013-01-02
 Aubrey, Elizabeth (1996), The Music of the Troubadours, Indiana University Press, ISBN 978-0-253-21389-1, retrieved 2013-01-02
 Chronique dite de Baudoin d'Avesnes, Arras, BM, ms. 0863, f. 007, 126v, 149v
 "Hybride jouant de la cornemuse". Sorbonne, Paris. Archived from the original on 2017-01-10. Retrieved 2017-01-09.
 Chaucer, Geoffrey, The Canterbury Tales: Prologue to "The Miller's Tale" (line 565), retrieved 2013-01-02
 "Cochon jouant de la cornemuse". Sorbonne, Paris. Archived from the original on 2017-01-10. Retrieved 2017-01-09.
 The Great Highland Bagpipes (an piob-mhor), The Northport Pipe Band, NY, archived from the original on February 11, 2013, retrieved 2013-01-02
 "The Rostock Chanter". www.bagpipesociety.org.uk. Retrieved 2021-06-06.
 J. E. A. Dawson, Scotland Re-Formed, 1488–1587 (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2007), ISBN 0-7486-1455-9, p. 169.
 J. Porter, "Introduction" in J. Porter, ed., Defining Strains: The Musical Life of Scots in the Seventeenth Century (Peter Lang, 2007), ISBN 3-03910-948-0, p. 35.
 Donnelly, Seán, The Early History of Piping in Ireland (2001), p. 9
 Derrick, John (1581), The Image of Irelande, London
 Jaine, Caroline (2011-10-04), Doing business with Pakistan, Dawn, retrieved 2013-02-02
 Abbas, Nosheen (2012-12-31). "The thriving bagpipe business of Pakistan". BBC News Online. Pakistan. Retrieved 2013-01-02.
 Roza-Vigil, Susana (1999-11-05), Bagpipes resonate through rugged coastline of... Spain, WorldBeat, Spain: CNN, retrieved 2013-01-02
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bagpipes.
	Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Bag-pipe.
Bagpipe iconography – Paintings and images of the pipes.
Musiconis Database of Medieval Musical Iconography: Bagpipe.
A demonstration of rare instruments including bagpipes
The Concise History of the Bagpipe by Frank J. Timoney
The Bagpipe Society, dedicated to promoting the study, playing, and making of bagpipes and pipes from around the world
Bagpipes from polish collections (Polish folk musical instruments)
Bagpipes (local polish name "Koza") played by Jan Karpiel-Bułecka (English subtitles)
Official site of Baghet (bagpipe from North Italy) players.
Celtic Music : Scottish Military Bagpipes.