How to Get Into Reading a Book
Download Article
METHODS
1Staying Interested in the Book
2Finding the Time to Read
3Selecting Good Books
+Show 1 more...
OTHER SECTIONS
Expert Q&A
Tips and Warnings
Related Articles
References
Co-authored by Christopher Taylor, PhD
Last Updated: April 29, 2021 References

If you're having trouble getting interested in a new book, there are lots of ways you can help motivate yourself to love reading. If you're given the choice, it's important to choose books about topics or genres that you're interested in. Read in a distraction-free environment and talk to others about the book to help you get excited about reading it. By dedicating time each day specifically for reading, you'll be done with your book in no time.

Method
1
Staying Interested in the BookDownload Article
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 1
1
Create a distraction-free reading environment. Find somewhere calm, quiet, and comfortable for you to read, such as a comfy chair in a sunlit room or in a hammock outside. Put away all technology, such as phones, tablets, computers, and televisions, so that you won't be distracted.[1]
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 2
2
Complete nagging tasks beforehand so your mind can focus on reading. Allowing your mind to wander or daydream while reading won't allow you to truly take in what you're reading and you'll give up more easily. Put aside all thoughts of undone chores or things you'd rather be doing and focus on the book.[2]
If you need to finish up homework, respond to emails, or do laundry, complete these tasks before sitting down to focus on a book.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 3
3
Take notes to help you remember key characters and other information. If you find yourself forgetting which character is which while reading, start writing down information about the people, places, and events that take place.[3]
You can also write down your thoughts, reactions, and predictions about the book as you read.
Keep the notebook and a pen next to you as you're reading.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 4
4
Talk with others about what you read to get new perspectives. Once you start a new book, ask friends, family members, or coworkers if they've read it. If they have, you can talk about the characters, plot lines, or themes to help you get excited and interested in the book.[4]
If they haven't read the book, you can talk about themes in the book that you find interesting, or characters that remind you of people in your own life.
Ask friends and coworkers if they have any book suggestions for you.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 5
5
Join a book club to help motivate you. Book clubs will encourage you to read more often so that you can keep up with the book club's picks. You'll get to discuss the book with others and join a community of people who can encourage you to read as well.[5]
Check the newspaper, classifieds, or social media to see if there is a book club near you.
Create an informal book club with your friends or coworkers.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 6
6
Read the book aloud or mouth the words to help you focus. If you're having trouble concentrating on the book, try reading it aloud for a few pages. This helps your brain focus entirely on the words and their meaning.[6]
If you're in a public place and don't want to disturb others, try softly mouthing the words instead of speaking them aloud.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 7
7
Hold a notecard or bookmark under the line you are currently on. This will help you to focus on 1 line at a time and prevent your eyes from wandering down the page. Move the notecard or bookmark down as you complete each line, but not until you have read the last word in the line.
Method
2
Finding the Time to ReadDownload Article
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 8
1
Set aside at least 20 minutes of dedicated reading time each day. The 20 minutes can be at any point during the day, but try not to split the 20 minutes up into smaller increments. Dedicating 20 minutes each day to reading (and sticking to it) will help turn reading into a habit.[7]
Set a timer for 20 minutes—or 30 or 40 minutes, if desired—so that you know how long you've been reading.
If you find yourself wanting to keep reading after the 20 minutes are up, keep going!
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 9
2
Read after you wake up as opposed to right before bed. Many times, you'll start reading before going to bed and will only get through a couple of pages before becoming too tired. By reading right after you wake up, you'll be much more alert and will be more interested in the book.[8]
Try reading both before bed and in the morning to take advantage of down time.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 10
3
Keep a book with you at all times. There are lots of times you could be reading in your spare time, like when you're at the doctor's office, at a park, or waiting for a lunch date to show up. By keeping a book in your purse, car, briefcase, or backpack, you'll be able to read during any free moments you have.[9]
Reading during things like television commercial breaks will help you make use of even more reading time.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 11
4
Take advantage of travel time. If you take a bus, train, or other type of public transportation to work, bring a book with you to read during the commute. If someone else drives you to school, work, or other activities, use this time to get in some extra pages.[10]
While you can't read a book if you're driving, you can listen to the book on tape. Listening to an audiobook requires the same mental process as reading a book, so it's fine to do this.[11]
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 12
5
Use technology to fit in extra reading time. There are book apps that you can download on your phone, tablet, or computer, making it easy to read even if you don't have a physical book with you. Peruse the books available on these apps to find one that you're interested in.[12]
There are many books you can download on apps that are completely free, while others will cost money.
If you download the app on all of your devices and read it on different ones, most apps will sync together, making it easy to pick up your reading spot no matter which device you're using.
Method
3
Selecting Good BooksDownload Article
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 13
1
Choose books that interest you. If you love non-fiction or books about love stories, look for books that focus on these interests. Selecting books in your favorite genre or that center around a topic you're interested in will make reading the book much easier and more enjoyable.[13]
For example, sports lovers can look for books on football, sports car racing, or running.
If you like medieval history, search for books in the historical fiction section that feature medieval characters.
Do a search online to find great books about your desired topic.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 14
2
Go to your local library for new reads. Visiting the library is a great way to find a broad range of books for free. You can ask a librarian for suggestions and check out books each week to read—just don't forget to return them by the due date.[14]
If you've never been to your local library, go in and sign up for a library card so that you can start checking out books.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 15
3
Visit used book stores to find good deals on books. While you can always go to a bookstore and buy new books, purchasing them used will help you save money. Look up used book stores in your area, or visit a regular bookstore and shop in the sale section.[15]
Stock up on books so that you'll always have one to read next.
Ask an employee for good book recommendations if you're not sure which book to choose.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 16
4
Read up to 3 books at once for a variety of options. Reading multiple books at one time will ensure that there's always something interesting to read. Sometimes you might want to read a different book depending on your mood, and by starting a few at once, you'll always have one that you're interested in.[16]
If you get tired of reading a mystery, you can switch to a memoir, while a graphic novel might be a good choice for a before-bedtime book.
Reading multiple books at once doesn't work for everyone, so if you'd rather read one book at a time, this is okay too.
Image titled Get Into Reading a Book Step 17
5
Stop reading a book if you're not interested in it. If you're reading a book for pleasure, you want it to be engaging and worth your time. Don't suffer through a book that you don't like just to finish it—give it a chance, and if you don't like it, switch to another book that you do like.[17]
If the book is part of an assignment and isn't optional, you'll have to power through it.