How to Ride a Mechanical Bull
Download Article
PARTS
1Mounting the Bull
2Balancing on the Bull
OTHER SECTIONS
Questions & Answers
Video
Tips and Warnings
Related Articles
References
Article Summary
Co-authored by wikiHow Staff
Last Updated: November 3, 2019 Approved

The use of mechanical bulls was originally intended for bull riders in training, but now they've become a popular activity at parties and western bars across the country. If you want to impress people with your bull riding skills, you'll need to master mounting the bull, assuming the correct positioning, and balancing so you can stay on as long as possible. Follow these steps to master bull riding and maybe even win a prize in a bull-riding contest!

Part
1
Mounting the Bull
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 1
1
Jump up and bring 1 leg over the bull to sit in the saddle. Most mechanical bulls are surrounded by bouncy, padded flooring. Use this padding to hop up and get your right or left leg over the bull. Then, use your hands and arms to steady yourself on top. Your legs should hang down on each side of the bull's back.[1]
Some people might have trouble initially mounting the bull because it is too high. This is why you should use the padded flooring to your advantage.
Try not to jump too high because you might miss and jump over the bull completely.
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 2
2
Hold on to the rope palm up with your non-dominant hand. Mechanical bulls will either have a padded strap or a long rope handle that you can hold on to. Use this after you jump up on the bull to stable yourself and adjust your positioning. It is best to hold on to it underhanded with your non-dominant hand.[2]
Holding on to the rope underhand allows for the best stability when the bull is in motion. It also helps you to release your grip more easily when you fall.
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 3
3
Move your body forward in the saddle and squeeze it with your thighs. It's best to position your body as far forward on the saddle as you can. This will help to minimize your movement, which will ultimately keep you on the bull longer. Once you are far up on the saddle, squeeze the sides of the bull with your thighs so you are firmly rooted to the bull's body.[3]
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 4
4
Pull your legs forward. Position your legs forward and avoid angling them behind you when you're sitting on the bull. If your feet are behind you, it will be harder for you to balance while the bull is moving and you may fall forward on the bull if it moves down.[4]
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 5
5
Dig your heels into the bull's side. Once your legs are positioned correctly, dig your heels into the sides of the bull and point your toes outward. This will allow you to get a better grip on the bull with your feet.[5]
Don't use your toes to try to hold on to the bull. They do not have enough strength to keep a good grip.
Part
2
Balancing on the Bull
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 6
1
Relax your upper body. In order for your bull ride to last a long time, you'll need to make sure your entire upper body is relaxed. If you're too stiff, the momentum will swing you off the bull and you'll fall over quickly. A relaxed body during a mechanical bull ride will resemble a flag waving in the wind. Your upper body should sway along with the bull's motions.[6]
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 7
2
Raise your dominant hand in the air for balance. Hold onto the rope with your non-dominant hand and raise your dominant hand in the air to balance yourself. To do this, keep your arm in an “L” shape, instead of holding it straight out or up in the air. While the bull is in motion, use your best judgment to move your arm around so that it keeps you in place.[7]
Keeping your dominant hand free is the best option to break your fall if you happen to lose your balance.
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 8
3
Keep your eyes on the bull's head. Avoid the urge to look out into the crowd at your friends while you're riding the mechanical bull. It is best to keep your eyes on the back of the bull's head the entire time. This will help you to watch for directional changes and ultimately keep balance. Looking up will distract you, and you'll have trouble adjusting your body when the bull changes directions.[8]
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 9
4
Move your upper body in a seesaw motion. When the bull is in motion, its body will be moving up and down like a seesaw. You'll need to mirror these movements with your body in order to stay on as long as possible. When the bull's head goes down, lean your upper body back so you don't fall forward. When the bull's head goes up, lean all the way forward so you don't fall back.[9]
Make sure you continue to keep your body loose while you're making these movements. If your body is rigid, you'll be thrown off pretty quickly.
Always maintain a firm grip with your legs while you're moving forward and back with your upper body.
Image titled Ride a Mechanical Bull Step 10
5
Sway your upper body slightly right or left when the bull turns. The mechanical bull will also be swaying left and right and spinning in circles. You'll want to adjust your body to these movements as well. If the bull goes left, try to lean a bit right. If the bull goes right, then try leaning a bit left. When the bull spins in circles, try to lean in the opposite way to keep your balance.[10]