How to sand timber floors
Timber floors.
How to sand timber floors

Play Video
Part 1
How to sand timber floors
Part 2
How to seal timber floors


Overview
You can give an old timber floor a big facelift by sanding it down. We show you how to use sanding machines the professionals use to get the job done. We also give you a few helpful tips on using sandpaper.
Tools and materials
Tools
Detail sander
Drum sander
Dust mask
Ear muffs
Hammer
Hand sander
Nail punch
Safety glasses
Steps
1
Prepare to sand the floorboards
Start by making sure your floor is ready for sanding. Check every nail is sitting below the surface, to avoid the sandpaper catching and ripping. Any nails sitting above the timber should be knocked in with a hammer and a nail punch.
A person using a nail punch and hammer on a hardwood floor
2
Install a sandpaper belt on the drum of the sander
Lay the drum sander on its side. Lift up the cover of the drum and slide the paper on. Sometimes the sandpaper can be a bit tight and hard to install. If that happens, wipe a little bit of fine sawdust on the inside of the belt to help the belt to slide on. If your floor needs a lot of sanding, start with a rough, 40-grit paper. For a floor in better condition, a lighter 60- or 80-grit is better. Use a finer, 120-grit for the second pass.
A person fitting a sanding belt to a floor sander
3
Sand the floor with a drum sander
Make sure the drumhead is sitting off the floor, then pull back the lever that drops the drumhead onto the surface of the floor. To achieve the best results, push the drum sander forward along the grain of the floorboards, one row at a time. Move at a gradual, even pace to ensure the sander creates an even finish. At the end of each row push the lever down to lift the drum off the floor. Then reposition the sander to the next row and start again.
A floor sander on a hardwood floor
4
Sand the edges of the floor with an edging sander
Use an edging sander to get closer to the skirting boards where the drum sander can't reach. Because these sanders use a disc that sands across the grain, you'll need a finer grit paper than the one you used on the drum sander.

A hardwood floor before being sanded
5
Sand the tight corners with a detail sander
Detail sanders are great for sanding in tight corners, under kitchen cabinets and inside cupboards. They reach in where the other, more powerful sanders can't. Once again, for the best results, move the sander with an even and gradual motion.
A hardwood floor after being sanded
6
Ready to seal your floor?
Check out our video on how to seal timber floors.