Method
STEP 1
Lightly whisk 2 large eggs, 6 tbsp single cream or full cream milk and a pinch of salt together until the mixture has just one consistency.

STEP 2
Heat a small non-stick frying pan for a minute or so, then add a knob of butter and let it melt. Don’t allow the butter to brown or it will discolour the eggs.

STEP 3
Pour in the egg mixture and let it sit, without stirring, for 20 seconds. Stir with a wooden spoon, lifting and folding it over from the bottom of the pan.

STEP 4
Let it sit for another 10 seconds then stir and fold again.

STEP 5
Repeat until the eggs are softly set and slightly runny in places. Remove from the heat and leave for a moment to finish cooking.

STEP 6
Give a final stir and serve the velvety scramble without delay.

RECIPE TIPS
GETTING THE BEST RESULTS
Chef Bill Granger says, always use a non-stick pan with a wooden spoon for best results and easy cleaning. Don't over-stir - think of theseas folded eggs rather than scrambled. The eggs should have the texture of soft curds. It's best not to cook more than three portions in one go as you will overcrowd the pan and the eggs won't cook as well. For larger numbers, cook in two pans rather than one.
MORE SCRAMBLED EGGS IDEAS
For more creamy eggs inspiration, check out these scrambled eggs recipes with a twist.

How to Make Fluffy Moist Scrambled Eggs – A method for cooking fluffy, moist, flavorful and evenly cooked scrambled eggs. Get great results every time with a few simple tips.

Overhead shot of scrambled eggs on two plates garnished with fresh parsley, fork, wooden cutting board with eggs and egg shells on the side.
Not to “toot my own horn,” but I’ve been told on more than one occasion that I make the best scrambled eggs in the history of scrambled eggs. I’ve been refining my scrambling method since junior high school home economics class… do they even offer that class anymore?… where I first learned how to pull the cooking edges from the outside in (details below). This simple tip, along with a few others I’ve learned along the way, have developed into a foolproof method for a scrumptious scramble every time. We eat scrambled eggs almost every morning for breakfast, so I’ve had plenty time to refine the technique. I’m excited to share it with you!

“Everybody knows how to scramble eggs,” you might think. True, anybody can scramble eggs, but making a fluffy, moist scramble is a bit of an art form. I really loathe overcooked, rubbery or browned eggs. So many diners and delis serve them this way, which means I rarely go out for breakfast anymore. Why should I, when it’s perfectly easy (and way less expensive) to make tasty eggs at home? Here’s how!

Other Egg-cellent Recipe Ideas

How to Poach Eggs

Smoked Salmon Nova Lox Benedict

Potato Crusted Spinach Frittata

Crustless Brie, Vegetable and Egg Bake from Recipe Girl

Mushroom, Harissa and Goat Cheese Frittata

Recommended Products:

Mixing Bowl

Whisk

Skillet 


How to Make Scrambled Eggs
Learn how to make scrambled eggs! With this 5-ingredient recipe, they come out soft, creamy, and flavorful every time. An easy, delicious breakfast.

BREAKFAST / COOKING BASICS — JUMP TO RECIPE
Scrambled eggs

Scrambled eggs are one of the little luxuries of everyday life. When I make them, I savor every bite. They’re soft and creamy, rich and flavorful, and they just so happen to cook in under 5 minutes. Seriously, how amazing is that?

If you poke around the internet in search of the best scrambled eggs recipe, you’ll find a million sites claiming to have it. Don’t be fooled – when it comes to scrambled eggs, “best” is a matter of personal taste. You can load them up with butter or sour cream, or just keep them simple like me.

The recipe below is for my “best” scrambled eggs. I don’t add any fancy ingredients, so they’re easy to whip up on regular weekday mornings. Still, they’re fluffy, tender, and all around delicious. I love them, and I think you will too.

Uncooked eggs, chives, salt, and pepper

Scrambled Eggs Recipe Ingredients
To make this scrambled eggs recipe, you’ll need 5 basic ingredients:

Eggs, of course! Use the freshest ones you can find, from a local source if possible (we like Vital Farms). The fresher your eggs are, the sunnier, creamier, and more flavorful your scramble will be.
Milk, plant milk, or water – I whisk a little into the eggs before I cook them. This additional moisture makes the eggs extra-soft and creamy. If you use plant milk, make sure to pick one with a neutral flavor. I recommend unsweetened almond milk.
Extra-virgin olive oil or butter, for the pan. I always use olive oil because it’s what I keep handy. But butter works well too – it’ll add rich flavor to this recipe.
Salt…
And pepper! To add depth of flavor to these simple scrambled eggs.
Find the complete recipe with measurements below.

Hand whisking eggs in glass bowl

How to Make Scrambled Eggs
So, you have your ingredients. Now it’s time to cook! Here’s my easy method for how to make scrambled eggs:

First, beat the eggs. Place them in a medium bowl, and whisk until the yolk and whites are thoroughly combined.

Hand whisking beaten egg in a bowl

Add the milk or water, and whisk again! The beaten eggs should be an even yellow color, with no translucent spots or streaks.

Next, gently preheat the pan. Brush a small nonstick skillet with olive oil, or melt a little butter inside it. Warm the skillet over medium heat.

How to make scrambled eggs - soft eggs in a nonstick skillet

Finally, cook. Pour in the egg mixture, and let it cook for a few seconds, undisturbed. Then, pull a rubber spatula across the bottom of the pan to form large, soft curds of scrambled eggs.

Continue cooking over medium-low heat, folding and stirring the eggs every few seconds. As you work, make sure to scrape your spatula along the bottom and sides of the pan to continue to form curds and to prevent any part of the eggs from drying out.

For a soft, creamy scramble, stop when the eggs are mostly set, but a little liquid egg remains. Remove the pan from the heat, and season to taste with salt and pepper.

That’s it! The whole process will be over in under 5 minutes.

Creamy scrambled eggs in skillet

Scrambled Eggs Serving Suggestions
For an easy, delicious breakfast, garnish the scrambled eggs with chopped fresh chives, and dig in! For a larger meal, serve them with toast, a bagel, or avocado toast, breakfast potatoes, or your favorite fresh fruit. Scrambled eggs are also a great choice for a laid-back weekend brunch. I like to serve them with something sweet, like one of these recipes:

Banana Pancakes
Cinnamon Rolls
Strawberry Muffins
Chocolate Chip Muffins
Healthy Banana Bread
Blueberry Scones
Baked Oatmeal
For more brunch ideas, check out this post!

And now that you’ve learned how to make scrambled eggs, you can add them to other breakfast recipes, too! I especially love folding them into breakfast tacos and burritos. Find my go-to breakfast taco recipe here and my best breakfast burrito recipe here.

Scrambled eggs recipe

More Basic Breakfast Recipes
If you love this recipe, try making one of these breakfast basics next:

Poached Eggs
Sunny-Side-Up Eggs
Hard-Boiled Eggs
Soft-Boiled Eggs
Vegetable Frittata
Easy French Toast
Oatmeal
Granola
For over 60 more healthy breakfast ideas, check out this post!



