How to Set a Table: A Guide to Table Setting
Etiquette enthusiasts, look no further: AD editors present a go-to video guide for your next dinner party
By Hadley Keller

September 1, 2017

It's no secret that we at AD are fans of a well-appointed table. From linens and china to glassware and centerpieces, we're always on the hunt for the makings of a chic setting. But all the accessories in the world are useless if you don't know how to set a table. And it can often be more complicated than it looks: One Google search for "formal table setting" yields no fewer than a dozen possible formations, many replete with antiquated seafood forks and glasses for every type of beverage imaginable. To help clarify, we've distilled this dizzying array of flatware, wineglasses, and plates of every size into the essentials for every type of place setting, from formal occasions to casual dinners. Time to break out the china and prepare for your next dinner party. Once you know where everything goes, you can add your own creativity by mixing and matching plates, using colorful glassware, or adding elaborately folded napkins.

How to Set a Table for an Everyday Dinner
Lay out a place mat, if you're using one.
Place the dinner plate in the center of the table setting.
The fork is placed to the left of the plate.
Place the knife to the right of the dinner plate and then set the spoon to the right of the knife.
Set the water glass in the top right corner, above the knife.
The napkin can be placed on top of the dinner plate or beneath the fork.
How to Set a Table for a Casual Meal
Start by laying out a place mat.
Set the dinner plate in the center of the table setting. If you’re serving salad, set the salad plate atop the dinner plate.
Place the fork to the left of the dinner plate. If you’re serving salad, set the salad fork to the left of the dinner fork.
Place the knife to the right of the dinner plate and then set the spoon to the right of the knife.
Set the water glass in the top right corner, above the knife.
Place the wineglass (either a red or a white wineglass, depending on what you’re serving) to the right of the water glass.
The napkin can be placed on the plates or underneath the fork.
How to Set a Table for Formal Events
Begin by laying out a crisp tablecloth. Then place the dinner plate in the middle of the setting. (For a more traditional table setting, place a charger plate beneath the dinner plate.)
Next, add the salad plate on top of the dinner plate.
The bread plate should be placed above and to the left of the dinner and salad plate. The butter knife can be placed horizontally on the bread plate.
The dinner fork goes to the left of the dinner plate and the salad fork goes to the left of the dinner fork.
Place the knife to the right of the dinner plate and then set the spoon to the right of the knife.
The dessert spoon should be placed horizontally above the dinner plate.
Water and white and red wineglasses go in the upper right corner or the place setting. The water glass should be closest to the guest (since hopefully they drink more water than wine), and the red wineglass goes just behind the white wineglass.
Fold the napkin (or use a chic napkin ring) and place it on top of the salad plate.
Add a place card above the dessert spoon. Write the guest's name on both sides so they can find their seat and the guests on the other side of the table will know who they are talking to.
The coffee cup and saucer can be set below the glasses with the dessert course.