How to Shave Your Legs Perfectly
Say bye to nicks, stubble, and ingrowns.
By Deanna Pai

June 30, 2019
women with shaved legs and boots
SCA PICTURES
All products featured on Glamour are independently selected by our editors. However, when you buy something through our retail links, we may earn an affiliate commission.

The thing about hair removal is that, unlike other normal rites of passage, such as riding a bike or learning how to parallel-park, no one ever actually teaches you how to shave your legs. Even in the beauty world, there are few YouTubers posting videos about how to shave correctly. Tutorials about shaving your legs do exist, but those making them aren't exactly experts. The same goes for waxing your own legs.

If we were to take a wild guess, most of us probably bought a razor, loaded our legs up with shaving cream, and got to shaving—that's it. But if you're constantly dealing with itchy legs, ingrown hairs, and stubble that seems to grow back in 10 minutes, there might be room for improvement in your shaving game. Read on to find out how to shave your legs perfectly.

1. Grab a clean, sharp razor.
It sounds obvious, but how many of us have let a razor go for way too long before replacing it or changing the blade? Yeah, that's what we thought. Using a razor that is dry, sharp, and rust-free will always give you the closest, cleanest shave possible. Dull blades lead to nicks and cuts, so you want to avoid dull razors at all costs. Pros generally advise changing out your blade after 5 to 10 shaves, which could be anytime between a week and a month depending on how often you shave. Many razors now come with moisture indicator strips that fade with use to give you a heads-up that it's time to swap your blade.

Another tip we've found helpful? Invest in a shaving subscription like Billie, Harry's, Dollar Shave Club, or Flamingo—all of which deliver blades or custom shaving kits right to your door. If you do prefer to grab your razors at the drugstore, though, you can check out a list of our favorite razors here.

Gillette Venus Platinum Extra Smooth Razor- Glamour Beauty Awards 2019 
The Best Razor
“Diamonds are a girl's best friend, but who knew that they would make a disposable razor a BFF too? The beauty of this blade is the diamondlike coating, which actually allows it to get closer to your skin with fewer nicks. That means smoother, more comfortable skin postshave.” —Ni’Kita Wilson, cosmetic chemist
$15
Gillette Venus Platinum Extra Smooth Razor
Buy Now
2. Wet your legs.
We've all probably been in a situation when we've wanted to shave as quick as humanly possible. But here's why it's important to soak your legs in the bathtub or shower for a few minutes before a razor hits your skin: It's easier to miss spots or get nicks when your legs aren't thoroughly wet. "Letting your skin sit in a wet, warm environment allows for your skin and hair to soften," says Whitney Bowe, M.D., a dermatologist in NYC. Softer hair and opened-up follicles (from the steam) make it easier to get a close, comfortable shave, so you're less likely to feel new stubble later that day.

3. Exfoliate.
In addition to soaking your legs, you also want to use a loofah or body scrub to slough off dead skin before you shave. "Some people think that when you shave, you’re also exfoliating your skin, which is technically true," says NYC dermatologist Dendy Engelman, M.D. But she notes it isn't going to give you as clean of a shave if don't you prep the area beforehand, especially if you're prone to razor bumps and irritation. How come? If you don't exfoliate, those dead skin cells can clog up the razor blade, which is what causes razor burn, says Bowe. Exfoliating first essentially creates a clean, even canvas for you to then remove hair.

4. Apply shaving cream.
Shaving cream sounds like something made up by razor companies to charge you an extra $10, but there really is science behind why it's a better option to use it instead of body wash or bar soap. "Conditioning your skin before shaving will soften the hair and the hair follicle," says Engelman. "That way there's less irritation when a razor goes across your skin." Squirt a dollop of shaving cream into your hand and spread a thin, even layer over the surface of your legs. (We're big fans of the Gillette Venus with Olay Moisturizing Shower & Shave Cream.) If you're traveling or really in a pinch, you can use hair conditioner, which makes the best alternate to shaving cream because of its emollient and conditioning properties.

5. Shave against the direction of hair growth.
Beginning at your ankle, slowly and carefully shave upward. An upward leg shave ensures you're shaving against the direction of hair growth, which provides a closer shave. (While it's inadvisable on the bikini line due to potential razor burn, it's perfectly safe on your legs.) There's no need to press hard—in fact, doing so can cause dimples or divots in your skin, which can lead to nicks or missed spots. The one exception to the "shave against the grain" rule is if you're shaving with the new Schick Intuition F.A.B. razors, which are designed to shave cleanly and safely in both directions.

6. Rinse your razor.
After a few strokes your razor will be filled with both shaving cream and stubble. Rinse it off with clean, warm water and continue shaving. If you notice hairs are stuck (it happens), try holding it directly under the shower head or faucet to let the water pressure push them out. If they're still stuck, you can gently pat the blade on a towel or use toilet paper on a dry razor to finagle them out. Never try to use your fingers to clean the blade.

7. Rinse your legs.
Once you've shaved all the hair on your legs, rinse off and run your hands over them to make sure you didn't miss any spots. (The backs of ankles and tops of knees are often easy to miss.) If you find any lingering stubble, reapply shaving cream to the spots with hair. Reshave and rinse again.

8. Store your razor in a clean, dry place.
While keeping your razor in the shower is most certainly the easiest place to store it, it's actually the worst spot you can leave it. "Not only can keeping your razor in a moist environment rust the blades, it also increases your risk of bacterial or fungal infection," says Bowe. Make sure to put the blade protector back over the blade and stash your razor in a spot where it won't get wet.

9. Dry off and moisturize.
After drying off, use a lotion or oil to hydrate your legs. (These are some of our favorite body oils and lotions.) Moisturizing them will help prevent the little red bumps that can sometimes crop up after shaving. Bonus: It'll also make your legs look and feel extra smooth and silky.