The different types of basketball scoring shots and how to execute them
SHARE
Facebook
Twitter
Whatsapp
Email
Three point shoot by Sara Giauro (Phard Vomero Napoli) during FIBA Europe Cup Women Finals 2005Three point shoot by Sara Giauro (Phard Vomero Napoli) during FIBA Europe Cup Women Finals 2005 (Photo Credit: Wikimedia Commons)

ABL 2017 26 NOV 2017 - 11 MAR 2018

Like most other ball games, to win in a game of basketball is to land more baskets or outscore your opponent and yield a higher field goal percentage.

Therefore, it is essential that you are familiar with the different ways that you are able to make a basket and score points. In this article, we will be sharing with you the different types of basketball scoring shots and how you can execute them.

Fundamentals in shooting
To shoot accurately, square your shoulders to the basket and place your feet shoulder length apart. With your knees bent slightly and back leaning towards the basket, put the fingers of your shooting hand under the ball and tuck your elbows close to your body.

Flick your wrist towards the hoop to release the shot. Your index finger should follow through facing the basket after releasing the ball.

Here are a few commonly used types of shooting in basketball.

1. Jump Shot
A jump shot is most frequently used for a mid to long-range shots, including shooting beyond the arc.

To achieve balance when facing the basket for a jump shot, you have to take a wide stance, usually, shoulder width apart, bend your knees and square your shoulders.

Make a fluid, explosive upward leap and at the apex of the jump, follow through by shooting the ball.

When the ball is released at the apex of the jump shot, keep your elbows straight to ensure that it is pointed in the direction of the basket. Concentrate on the flicking of your wrist and holding it in position to provide the ball with momentum and spin.


2. Hook Shot
A hook shot is when the shot is made while your body is not directly facing the basket.

To execute a shoot shot, you need to face the basket sideways so that your shooting hand dribbling the ball is facing away from the basket. This is also the stance to help guard the ball against your opponent. This makes it difficult for your opponent to try to block the shot due to the distance created between you and your defender.

To make the shot, jump with your left foot pushing off the ground if you’re making a right-handed shot or vice versa. The shooting arm should be slightly bent, and it should thrust upwards as the ball is lobbed with a flick of the wrist.

The hook shot is a staple of many players in the National Basketball Association, including notable stars such as George Mikan, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Magic Johnson, and Yao Ming.


3. Bank Shot
A bank shot is when any shot made where the ball hits the backboard before heading into the net.

To execute a bank shot, treat it as though you’re taking a jump shot but this time, aim slightly higher by shooting for the backboard.

Jumping higher can also sometimes mean jumping slightly backwards when aiming for the basket to prevent defenders from blocking the shot.

The ball should not be hitting the rim too much after bouncing off the backboard. The ball should then bounce off the backboard and into the net.


4. Free Throw
A free throw is a shot attempt given to a player that was fouled and it is taken on the free throw line. The player must stay behind the free throw line when taking the shot.

Before attempting to shoot, one must maintain their balance. Find the nail or dot in the middle of the free throw line and line your shooting foot against it. For right-handed shooters, the shooting foot will be the right foot and vice versa.

Your elbow on your shooting hand must be lined up to make an “L” right under the ball with fingers spread out for the backspin.

Aim for the back of the rim with your eyes focusing on the rims, do not look at the ball while you execute the shot.

Follow through your shot by keeping your hands up in the air for a second or two after releasing the ball.


5. Layup
A layup is a shot made from short range by a player moving towards the basket. Usually utilising the backboard if he approaches the hoop from an angle. This is also one of the most basic and common way of scoring a basket in the game.

To execute a layup, dribble the ball towards the basket. If you’re on the right flank, dribble the ball with your right hand.

At the three-point line, or within two metres from the basket, take two giant strides towards the hoop and attempt to score by throwing the ball at the top corner of the backboard or lay the ball gently into the basket.


6. Slam Dunk
The dunk is usually the most spectacular shot and is one of the toughest feats in basketball.

It usually requires more jumping ability than shooting skills.

To execute a slam dunk, dribble and charge towards the hoop when ready to execute the dunk.

Jump explosively to get as high as possible and leap towards the hoop. Lift the ball above the rim and push or slam it forcefully through the rim.

Most people jump off one foot, but you might find that you can jump higher off both feet. So there you have it, six ways of scoring in basketball. Start practicing and perhaps find out which way works for your best, depending on your role and position in the team.


Are you a parent looking to have your child pick up the sport of basketball? Whether to give your child an introduction to this fun team sport or to raise his/her skill level up a notch, the ActiveSG Basketball Academy is designed to do just that.

Our qualified coaches from the top level of the game in Singapore will give your child a sound grounding in the fundamentals. While more advanced players can look forward to a pathway to expand their game, to find out more details or to register, visit this link here.