Snatch (weightlifting)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The snatch is the first of two lifts contested in the sport of weightlifting (also known as Olympic weightlifting) followed by the clean and jerk. The objective of the snatch is to lift the barbell from the ground to overhead in one continuous motion. There are four main styles of snatch used: squat snatch (or full snatch), split snatch, power snatch, and muscle snatch. The squat snatch and split snatch are the most common styles used in competition while power snatch and muscle snatch are mostly used for training purposes.

In the squat snatch, the lifter lifts the bar as high as possible and pulls themselves under it in a squat position, receiving the bar overhead with the arms straight, decreasing the necessary height of the bar, therefore increasing the amount of weight that the lifter may successfully lift. The lifter finally straightens to a fully upright position with the bar above their head and arms fully extended.

In the split snatch, the lifter lifts the bar as high as possible and pulls themselves under the bar similar to the squat snatch but in the split snatch the lifter "splits" his legs, placing one foot in front of them and one behind, allowing themselves to receive the bar lower as in the squat snatch. The split snatch has become much less common with the increased popularity of the squat snatch but is occasionally performed by some lifters.

In the power snatch, the lifter lifts the barbell as high as possible and receives the bar overhead with only a slight bend in the knee and hip, increasing the height that the bar must be lifted and decreasing the amount of weight that may be successfully lifted.

In the muscle snatch, the lifter lifts the bar all the way overhead with arms locked out and the hip and knee fully extended.[1]


Contents
1	Technique
1.1	First phase
1.2	Second phase
1.3	Third phase
1.4	Fourth phase
1.5	Fifth phase
1.6	Sixth phase
2	Application to other sports
3	World records
3.1	Men
3.2	Women
4	See also
5	References
Technique
Snatch2.gif
While the snatch is commonly referred to in three phases, Arthur Drechsler identifies six distinct phases of the pull in the snatch.

First phase
The lifter begins the first phase of the pull, or "Pre-lift off", with the feet placed approximately hip width apart, toes turned out slightly with the bar above the midfoot. The shins will be inclined toward the bar so that the shin is touching or close to the bar. Hips are placed so that the top of the thigh is approximately parallel to the ground but may also be slightly higher or lower depending on the lifter.[2] The lifters back should be straight, no excessive curvature or rounding in the lumbar spine, with slight extension of the thoracic spine and shoulders slightly pulled back.[2] The shoulders should be positioned so that they are directly over or slightly forward of the bar.[2] The bar is gripped with a very wide grip. The neck should be positioned in line with the torso or slightly more vertical. During the first pull, the lifter begins to exert force on the bar, separating the weight from the platform.[2]

Second phase
The second phase of the pull, or "preliminary acceleration" begins with the weight separated from the floor. In the second phase, the lifter begins by extending the knee and moving the hip upward while maintaining a constant back angle relative to the floor.[2] During this phase, the lifter pulls the bar closer to his body and the center of gravity of the lifter shifts toward the heel.[2] During this phase, the lifter begins to accelerate the bar and towards the end of the phase, the torso begins to assume a more vertical position.

Third phase
During the third phase, or "adjustment phase", the lifter begins to position his body appropriately for the final explosive pull. The knees typically perform a "double knee bend", where the knee bends from the previous extension of the knee during the second phase, and the torso continues to become more vertical.[2] During this phase, the lifter doesn't apply as great a force on the bar as in the previous phases.[2]

Fourth phase
During the fourth phase of the pull, or "final acceleration" the lifter performs the final acceleration on the bar. This is executed by explosively extending the hip, knee, and ankles (or plantar-flexing).This is followed by an upward elevation of the shoulders (the "shrug"),[2] and simultaneously lifting the heels or the whole foot off the ground. The lifters torso will usually lean slightly backwards during this phase, and the bar is accelerated upward with a slightly arced trajectory.[2]

Fifth phase
The fifth phase of the pull, or "unsupported squat phase", occurs when the lifter has fully extended his knees, hips, and ankle. The lifter bends his arms at the elbow, pulling himself under the bar. Simultaneously he moves his feet slightly apart into the squat position and begins to move downward into the squat position[2]

Sixth phase
The sixth phase, or supported squat under, occurs when the lifters feet have landed flatfooted on the platform and the lifter pulls themselves into a squat position. The lifter then receives the bar overhead with the arms completely straight. From this position, the lifter recovers by squatting the weight to a fully erect position while maintaining the bar position overhead.[2]

Application to other sports
The snatch is also commonly used as a tool for training athletes in a variety of sports especially with athletes in sports where powerful full body movement is required such as throwing, sprinting, running, and jumping. The triple-extension in the snatch (simultaneous extension of the knee and hip, and plantar flexion at the ankle) mimics the movements previously mentioned while requiring the athlete to produce large amounts of power at high velocities. The snatch has an average velocity of 1.52–1.67 m/s.[3] This makes it a quality lift for training speed-strength in which the athlete aims to move a light weight (25–40% 1RM) at its fastest velocity (1.1–1.65 m/s)[3]

World records
See also: List of world records in Olympic weightlifting
These are the official records in the new weight classes:[4]

Men
Weight class	Name	Lift
55 kg	World standard	135 kg
61 kg	Li Fabin	145 kg
67 kg	Huang Minhao	155 kg
73 kg	Shi Zhiyong	169 kg
81 kg	Li Dayin	175 kg
89 kg	World standard	179 kg
96 kg	Sohrab Moradi	186 kg
102 kg	World standard	191 kg
109 kg	Yang Zhe	200 kg
109+ kg	Lasha Talakhadze	223 kg
Women
Weight class	Name	Lift
45 kg	World standard	85 kg
49 kg	Hou Zhihui	96 kg
55 kg	Li Yajun	102 kg
59 kg	Kuo Hsing-chun	110 kg
64 kg	Deng Wei	117 kg
71 kg	World standard	117 kg
76 kg	Rim Jong-sim	124 kg
81 kg	World standard	127 kg
87 kg	World standard	132 kg
87+ kg	Li Wenwen	148 kg
See also
Clean and press
References
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Snatch.
 Starr, Bill (January 2010). "Learning How to Do Full Snatches" (PDF). CrossFit Journal: 1. Retrieved 12 April 2016.
 Drechsler, Arthur (1998). The Weightlifting Encyclopedia: A Guide to World Class Performance. Flushing, NY: A is A Communication. pp. 23–28. ISBN 0965917924.
 Ajhan, T; Lazar, Baroga (1988). Weightlifting: Fitness For all Sports. Budapest, Hungary: Budapest International Weightlifting Federation. ISBN 9632538072.
 "World Records (new bw)". International Weightlifting Federation.