swing to (someone or something) (redirected from swinging something to)
swing to (someone or something)
1. To propel (oneself) in the direction of something by hanging onto something suspended from above and moving in a broad, sweeping arc or curve.
You've got to grab the rope and swing to the other side of the ravine.
The burglar held onto the flagpole and swung to the ledge of the open window.
2. To turn or pivot in some direction on or as on a hinge.
The refrigerator door swings to the right when you open it.
3. To cause someone to move to some point or in some direction with a swooping or sweeping motion. In this usage, a noun or pronoun is used between "swing" and "to."
He swung his dance partner to the side.
Let's swing this thing to the other side of the room.
The bouncer swung the rowdy man to the ground.
4. To shift or vacillate to some different opinion, belief, ideology, emotion, etc.
Public opinion has continued to swing in favor of previously socially unacceptable behaviors and lifestyles.
The whole world has swung to online banking, Dad. You really need to get with the times if you want to keep up.
5. To cause someone or some group shift or vacillate to some different opinion, belief, ideology, emotion, etc. In this usage, a noun or pronoun is used between "swing" and "to."
You're not going to swing anyone to your side with such inflammatory arguments.
Age tends to swing people to more conservative mindsets.
6. To convince or persuade someone or some group to something. In this usage, a noun or pronoun is used between "swing" and "to."
The incident swung the entire population to side of the rebel leaders.
She managed to swing the board to fund her side project for the next five years.
See also: swing, to
Farlex Dictionary of Idioms. © 2015 Farlex, Inc, all rights reserved.
swing to something
to change to a different position or attitude. The mood of the country is swinging to conservatism. Soon the attitudes of the people will swing to the opposite side.
See also: swing, to
McGraw-Hill Dictionary of American Idioms and Phrasal Verbs. © 2002 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
See also:
(have) got something going (with someone)
a/the feel of (something)
(I) wouldn't (do something) if I were you
a straw will show which way the wind blows
a crack at (someone or something)
all right
(you) wanna make something of it?
all for the best
a thing of the past
a slew of (something)


1 The monkey was swinging in the tree.

2 Huge cranes are swinging cargo up.

3 He walked briskly along the path swinging his rolled-up umbrella.

4 He sat on the stool, swinging his legs.

5 The swinging door is pivoted on one side; the revolving door is pivoted in the centre.

6 Jodi had stopped swinging. ‘Want a push?’ her dad asked.

7 He was walking along swinging his school bag.

8 She lashed out, her arm swinging wildly.

9 The police waded into the crowd swinging sticks.

10 The curtains were swinging from side to side in the breeze.

11 They charged the rival gang swinging clubs and knives.

12 Swinging her bag over her shoulder, she hurried on.

13 I could see him swinging from the branch of a large tree.

14 The soldiers advanced at a swinging trot.

15 He was swinging his bag back and forth .

16 Dad grew up in the swinging sixties.

17 Is there any chance of you swinging us a couple of tickets?

18 He started swinging at me with his fists.

19 Look,his car is swinging round.

20 She was swinging a bottle of wine by its neck.

21 The gunshot sent monkeys swinging away through the trees.

22 The stuffy “50s gave way to the swinging “60s.

23 He marched around,(www.TranslateEN.com) swinging the gun by its handle.

24 The soldiers came swinging down the street.

25 The mood amongst Tory MPs seems to be swinging away from their leader.

26 He walked down the road, casually swinging his bag.

27 Something he was swinging towards the window.

28 Pringle grabbed a large stick and began swinging at the dogs.

29 It’s a nostalgia trip back into the youth culture of the swinging 60s.

30 Ian lit a cigarette and sat on the end of the table, one leg swinging.

 

Learning English Faster Through Complete Sentences with “swinging”
 

Sentences are everywhere.
Without sentences, language doesn’t really work.

When you first started learning English, you may have memorized words such as: English meaning of the word “swinging”; But now that you have a better understanding of the language, there’s a better way for you to learn meaning of “swinging” through sentence examples.

True, there are still words that you don’t know. But if you learn whole sentences with “swinging”, instead of the word “swinging” by itself, you can learn a lot faster!

 

Focus your English learning on sentences with “swinging”.
 

Why Is Focusing on Sentences Important?
Sentences are more than just strings of words. They’re thoughts, ideas and stories. Just like letters build words, words build sentences. Sentences build language, and give it personality.

Again, without sentences, there’s no real communication. If you were only reading words right now, you wouldn’t be able to understand what I’m saying to you at all.

The Word “swinging” in Example Sentences.
“swinging” in a sentence.
How to use “swinging” in a sentence.
10 examples of sentences “swinging”.
20 examples of simple sentences “swinging” .

All the parts of speech in English are used to make sentences. All sentences include two parts: the subject and the verb (this is also known as the predicate). The subject is the person or thing that does something or that is described in the sentence. The verb is the action the person or thing takes or the description of the person or thing. If a sentence doesn’t have a subject and a verb, it is not a complete sentence (e.g., In the sentence “Went to bed,” we don’t know who went to bed).

Four types of sentence structure .
Simple Sentences with “swinging”
A simple sentence with “swinging” contains a subject and a verb, and it may also have an object and modifiers. However, it contains only one independent clause.

Compound Sentences with “swinging”
A compound sentence with “swinging” contains at least two independent clauses. These two independent clauses can be combined with a comma and a coordinating conjunction or with a semicolon.

Complex Sentences with “swinging”
A complex sentence with “swinging” contains at least one independent clause and at least one dependent clause. Dependent clauses can refer to the subject (who, which) the sequence/time (since, while), or the causal elements (because, if) of the independent clause.

Compound-Complex Sentences with “swinging”
Sentence types can also be combined. A compound-complex sentence with “swinging” contains at least two independent clauses and at least one dependent clause.