How to Take a Shower
PARTS
1Getting Ready to Shower
2Getting Yourself Clean
3Shaving and Brushing Teeth
+Show 1 more...
OTHER SECTIONS
Questions & Answers
VideoWATCH NOW
References
Article Summary
Author Info
Last Updated: August 21, 2021 References

Showering is an activity that millions of people make a part of their daily routine. It's a fast, effective and refreshing way to get clean. If you have played a sport or worked out, you should shower that day. Do you want to learn how to take a shower? Read on! Alternatively, if you want to not so subtly encourage someone else to take a shower, send them this article!

Part
1
Getting Ready to Shower
Image titled Take a Shower Step 1
1
Undress. Place your dirty clothes in a laundry basket. Put your clean clothes or pajamas in a safe place where they won't get wet from the shower water.[1]
Take off your glasses and take out any contacts.
Take off your watches, necklaces, and/or any other accessories.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 2
2
Get the water temperature right. Turn on the water and let it run until it is warm. Check the position of the shower head, to be sure that the water is spraying down rather than out of the shower. However, make sure it is not too hot. Your wrist is a more accurate gauge of temperature than your fingers, so use your wrist to determine if the temperature is actually comfortable.[2]
Consider taking the occasional cold or cool shower, especially when it is hot and humid out or after working out vigorously.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 3
3
Carefully enter your shower once the temperature is comfortable. If you jump in too quickly, you risk slipping and falling, so it's worthwhile to step in slowly.
Water-Saving Tip: Consider entering the shower before you perfect the temperature, even if it's still too cool. You can continue to adjust the water temperature while you shower. Just make sure it isn't freezing cold or scalding hot before you enter it!


AD
Part
2
Getting Yourself Clean
Image titled Take a Shower Step 4
1
Wet your entire body. Slowly turn around a couple times under the spray to let the water cover your entire body. If you are washing your hair, be sure that your entire head and hair is completely wet. Rinsing off loose dirt and dust is the first step to getting clean—and getting wet, particularly with warm water, helps your muscles relax.[3]
Image titled Take a Shower Step 5
2
Lather a small amount of shampoo into your hair. Work the lather gently down to your scalp, making sure all the strands of your hair are sudsy to their ends. You don't have to use too much shampoo—if you do you might run out quickly and it can strip your hair of healthy levels of natural oils. Just a quarter sized puddle of shampoo on your palm will do the trick. Always remember to start with a small amount, and add more if you need it.[4]
Tip: Wash your hair every other day rather than every single day. Washing your hair too much can damage it.[5]

Image titled Take a Shower Step 6
3
Thoroughly rinse all of the shampoo out of your hair. You don't want your hair to dry with soap residue in it.[6]
To check that there isn't any more shampoo still in your hair, wet it and then squeeze your hair and watch the color of the water that runs out. If you still see a little bit of shampoo in it, keep rinsing and repeat!
Image titled Take a Shower Step 7
4
Apply conditioner to your hair. In addition to simply cleaning, putting your preferred conditioner in your hair can improve the look, feel and health of your hair. Conditioner does not lather, so work it in from scalp to ends until you feel a layer of slickness all over your hair. Check your conditioners instructions. Many will recommend leaving the conditioner in for several minutes before rinsing it out. Others are actually meant to be applied after getting out of the shower.[7]
Some people prefer to use a combination shampoo and conditioner that doesn't require a separate step to apply.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 8
5
Wash your face. Wet your face and apply a small amount of facial cleanser or exfoliating scrub to your face with your fingers or a washcloth. Gently rub the cleanser around your face for at least 30 seconds, getting your cheeks, nose, chin and forehead, and potentially your neck and upper back if you experience acne breakouts there. Make sure you avoid getting any into your eyes. Especially if you use anti-acne wash, leave it on your face for at least 30 seconds so it can seep into your pores. Then rinse the washcloth and your face thoroughly.
You can use basic soap instead of a special face cleanser. This is better than not washing your face, but overuse of the wrong kind of soap on your face can dry out and irritate your skin.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 9
6
Wash your body. Apply your bar soap or body wash to your washcloth, loofah (shower poof), body sponge, or just your hands. Now, clean your entire body. Start at your neck and shoulders and work your way down. Be sure to wash under your arms and on your back. Wash your private parts and bottom last. Remember to wash behind the ears, back of the neck, and in between each toe.[8]
Image titled Take a Shower Step 10
7
Rinse off the soap. Turn around under the water and rub your body with your hands to get off lingering soap and loosened grime. Run your hands through your hair and make sure all the soap is rinsed out. If there are any areas you have missed, wash them now.
Part
3
Shaving and Brushing Teeth
Image titled Take a Shower Step 11
1
Shave your legs and underarms if you like. Many people shave their hair that grows on their legs and in their armpits, and find the shower to be the ideal time for this occasional task.
Shaving legs and armpits is very common for girls and women in some countries, but you can be clean without it. Ultimately it's a personal decision, so speak to a woman you trust if you're not sure what to do, and also consider the customs of your culture. Exfoliating legs with a body scrub helps remove dead skin for a cleaner shave.
Wet and lather shaving cream or conditioner on your legs.
Using a razor, shave upward, against the grain of your hair. Start with your ankles and work your way up. Don't forget the tops of your feet at the end.
Shave slowly to avoid cutting yourself, especially your knees and the back of your legs because you might hit a bump and cut yourself.
For your underarms, lather shaving cream or conditioner on your underarms and shave (slowly) upward and downward—underarm hair grows in both directions.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 12
2
Shave. Some men prefer to do their shaving in the shower as well. For this you need a shower mirror—one designed not to fog up in the water and steam. If you have one, shaving in the shower can be both convenient and a nice excuse to stay under the hot water a little longer.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 13
3
Shave your bikini area or male private parts if you wish. Some men and women also use the shower to trim or shave unwanted hair from around their genitals and bikini area. Be careful, though, and make sure your shower offers you a good place to stand and enough lighting to see clearly what you are doing.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 14
4
Brush your teeth. As weird as it sounds, brushing your teeth in the shower is actually very useful. You can brush your tongue and not be afraid of getting toothpaste in your hair or on your clothes.
Part
4
Finishing Up
Image titled Take a Shower Step 15
1
Give yourself a final rinse. This is important so no soap is left on your body. Make sure that there is no conditioner left in your hair before moving to the next step.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 16
2
Turn off the water. Make sure it is turned off tightly so you don't waste any valuable water. Prepare to leave the shower stall and gather any belongings you brought with you into the stall.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 17
3
Exit the shower. Step out carefully, as slipping on the floor in a bathroom can be dangerous.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 18
4
Dry off with a towel. Standing on the rug or mat, grab your towel from nearby. Gently dry your head, face, torso, abdominal area, pelvic region, legs, your private areas, and feet with a towel. If you have done this carefully, the only water should be on the shower mat or rug, not on the rest of the floor. When drying your face, remember to pat it gently with the towel rather than rub it.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 19
5
Apply any other hygiene products. Now is a good time to put on deodorant, lotion, aftershave, hair styling products that need to be applied when wet, or anything else you may need to put on that you can't put on when clothes cover your body.
Image titled Take a Shower Step 20
6
Put your clean clothes on, and repeat daily. Start with your clean undergarment, then put on the rest of your clothes. You are now fully showered and ready for bed or to face the start of your day.