How To Tie A Tie Knot – Tying 18 Different Necktie Knots
This article will show you how to tie a tie in 18 different ways.

Want to signal power?

What about trust in a business relationship? Or casual approachability?

One subconscious signal can give this.

The tie knot.

Why?

It’s a subliminal message that speaks to our attention to detail.

Don’t believe me?

Look at nearly every President. The full Windsor knot.

Look at less formal business outfits. The four-in-hand or half Windsor knot.

Each style sends a different message and suits a different shirt collar and neck. There are tie knots for tall guys, short guys, big guys and skinny guys.

Yet most men use one tie knot their entire lives.

I'm showing you 18 ways to tie a necktie, so you will be able to tie all the best tie knots – starting with the quickest and easiest tie knot, the Simple or Oriental Knot.

Learn how to tie a tie step by step:
The Simple Knot (Oriental Knot) Tying Instructions
how to tie a simple oriental knot
Learn how to tie a tie: The Simple Oriental Knot:

Drape the tie around your collar with the seam facing inward and the thick end on your left, two or three inches lower than your desired finishing position.
Bring the thick end horizontally across the front of the narrow end, and then pass it back horizontally behind the narrow end.
Pass the thick end again across the front of the knot from left to right.
Now pass the thick end again behind the knot horizontally from right to left.
Pass the thick end AGAIN across the front of the knot from left to right. Slip a finger under this third horizontal loop.
Bring the tip of the thick end up underneath the loop around your collar and feed it up behind the knot, down over the front of the knot and through that third horizontal loop.
Pull the thick end through the horizontal loop and snug it down.
Adjust the tie by holding the knot in one hand and pulling gently on the narrow end with the other.
 

Click here to watch the YouTube video – The EASIEST Knot To Tie

Now you know how to tie a necktie the easiest way… are you ready for a challenge?

Click any of these 17 knots to find out if it's right for you and get step-by-step instructions.

Four In Hand Knot
Half Windsor Knot
Full Windsor Knot
Nicky Knot
Bow Tie Knot
Kelvin Knot
Pratt Knot
St Andrew Knot
Balthus Knot
Hanover Knot
Plattsburgh Knot
Grantchester Knot
Victoria Knot
Cafe Knot
Eldredge Knot
Trinity Knot
Christensen Knot
1. Four In Hand Knot
how to tie a four in hand knot
Learn how to tie a Four In Hand Knot:

Loop the tie around your collar. Thick end on the left, 3-4 inches lower than the thin end.
Cross the thick end in front of the thin end.
Wrap the thick end around behind the thin end and cross horizontally from right to left.
Bring the thick end horizontally across the front of the knot from right to left. Slip a finger beneath this horizontal band.
Turn the tip of the thick end upward and in, sliding it beneath the loop around your neck.
Feed the thick end down through the loop you’ve held open with your finger.
Pull the thick end all the way through the loop and snug the knot down tightly.
Tighten the knot by holding it gently in one hand and tugging on the thin end with the other.
The four in hand knot is one of the most popular necktie knots for beginners learning how to tie a tie. Not only is it easy to learn, but it's also one of the oldest – British horsemen are said to have invented it to tie scarves while holding the reins of four horses in the other hand.

This knot requires less of the tie’s length, making it a great choice for tall men trying to tie a regular length tie.

The narrower shape is perfect for narrow spread collars and button-down collar dress shirts.

2. Half Windsor Knot
how to tie a half Windsor knot
Learn how to tie a Half Windsor Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the wide end on your right hanging down to your thigh and the thin end on the left at about your rib cage.
Cross the wide end in front of the thin end from right to left, making an X-shape below your chin.
Loop the wide end of the tie horizontally around and behind the thin end.
Take the wide end over from the top and through the opening of the X and pull tight.
Hold the wide end with your right hand and wrap it in front over the thin end, from your right to your left.
Keeping the triangle intact with your left hand, bring the wide end towards your chest and from behind the loop, pass it over the X.
Using the index finger of your left hand, open up the triangle that has now formed over the X and pull the wide end all the way through.
To adjust the length, pull the knot up towards your collar while pulling the thin end of the tie down. You may need to adjust the horizontal loop to make sure it’s flat and even.
Along with the Four-In-Hand knot, the Half Windsor is most suited to guys just beginning to learn how to tie a tie.

This knot is the perfect choice for medium-width and thick ties. It is the most versatile and popular tie knot.

Because the half Windsor requires less of the tie’s length than the larger Windsor knot, it is also a great choice for big and tall men trying to wear a regular length tie.

3. Full Windsor Knot
how to tie a full Windsor knot
Learn how to tie a Full Windsor Knot or Double Windsor Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the wide end on the right hanging 4-6 inches lower than your waistband.
Cross the wide end horizontally in front of the slim end, making an X-shape just below your chin.
Tuck the wide end up and beneath the loop around your neck, coming out point-upward behind the X. Use one finger to hold the X in place.
Pull the wide end all the way down.
Bring the wide end around behind the knot and pass it horizontally from right to left.
Flip the wide end tip upward and tug it diagonally across the front of the knot.
Loop the wide end over the top of the loop around your collar and bring it back down. It should emerge on the left of the thin end.
Bring the wide end horizontally across the front of the knot, from left to right. This forms a horizontal band. Tuck a finger through it and hold it in place.
Bring the wide end underneath the loop one more time, around the collar with the tip aiming upward.
Turn the wide end downward and slide the tip through the horizontal loop you saved with your finger in step 8.
Pull the wide end all the way down and smooth out any creases or slack in the knot.
When I'm asked how to tie a tie, the Full Windsor Knot is always mentioned.  Also known as the Double Windsor, the Full Windsor has a large, triangular symmetric shape and is perfect for wide spread collars, and on men with a large neck.

Additional tie length is required for the Windsor knot because of the two wrappings. Tall men with a larger neck size will need a tie that measures between 61 – 64 inches.

4. Nicky Knot
how to tie a Nicky knot
Learn how to tie a Nicky Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the seam outward and the thick end on your left, about two inches lower than you want the finished position.
Cross the thick end underneath the thin end, making an X-shape below your chin.
Flip the thick end up in front of the loop around your collar, then tuck it down through the loop, emerging to the left of the thin end.
Bring the tip of the thick end horizontally across the front of the knot. Slip a finger underneath the horizontal band you’ve just created across the front of the knot.
Bring the tip of the thick end up and underneath the loop around your collar.
Tuck the tip of the thick end down through the horizontal loop you created in Step 4.
Pull the thick end all the way through the horizontal loop and snug it down.
Adjust the knot as needed by holding it with one hand and pulling on the narrow end of the tie with the other.
5. Bow Tie Knot
how to tie a bow tie knot
Learn How To Tie A Bow Tie Knot:

Start with the bow tie draped around your neck with the seams facing down and the right side longer than the left.
Place the right end over the left end, making an X-shape just below the chin.
Loop the longer end behind the ‘X’ to create a simple knot similar to the first knot while tying shoelaces. Pull tight and leave the longer end resting on your shoulder.
Placing your index finger on the widest part of the curve of the shorter end, fold it to create a bow shape. Place the folded tip across your collar with the shorter end as close to your neck as possible.
Holding the bow created above with the forefinger and thumb of your left hand, bring the longer end straight down over the shorter end in the middle of the bow.
Using your right hand, fold the longer end back towards the chest, pinch the fold and double the tip over to make a wing.
Tuck the folded tip of the longer end behind the folded tip of the shorter end and through the small loop you formed when you first passed it up behind the knot.
With the wings in place, tug the loops behind them to tighten the vertical front knot.
Hold the front of the knot down with one finger, and wriggle the wings until they're symmetrical.
Make final adjustments. Ensure your bow tie lies flat and horizontal against your collarbone. You're done! Now you know how to tie a tie AND how to tie a bow tie.
6. Kelvin Knot
how to tie a Kelvin knot
Learn how to tie a Kelvin Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the seam facing outward and the thick end on your left, hanging two to three inches lower than the desired finishing position.
Cross the thick end under the thin end from left to right, creating an X-shape under your chin.
Bring the thick end back across the front of the knot from right to left. Continue wrapping it around the thin end and pass it back from left to right behind the knot.
Next, bring the thick end horizontally across the front of the knot from right to left again. Slip a finger underneath the horizontal band this creates.
Tuck the thick end upward underneath the loop around your collar.
Bring the tip of the thick end down through the horizontal loop you created in Step 4 (but not the smaller one you created in Step 3).
Pull the thick end all the way through the horizontal loop, snugging the knot down into place.
Tighten the tie by grasping the knot with one hand and pulling gently on the narrow end with the other.
7. Pratt Knot
how to tie a pratt knot
Learn how to tie a Pratt Knot:

Drape the tie around your collar with its seam facing outward and the thick end hanging on your left, 1-2 inches lower than the desired finishing spot.
Cross the thick end underneath the thin end – forming an X-shape below your chin.
Pass the thick end through the loop.
Pull the thick end all the way down and flip the tip so that it’s pointing to your left.
Bring the thick end horizontally across the front of the knot (from right to left). Tuck a finger behind the horizontal band you’ve just created.
Slip the thick end up through the loop from underneath.
Point the tip of the thick end downward – directly on top of the narrow end.
Pull the thick end down through the horizontal band. Snug it firmly into place.
Adjust the necktie by grasping the knot with one hand while pulling on the narrow end gently with the other.
8. St Andrew Knot
how to tie a Saint Andrew knot
Learn how to tie a St Andrew Knot:

Drape the neck-tie around your collar with the seam facing out and the thick end on your left, two to three inches lower than the desired finishing position.
Cross the thick end horizontally beneath the thin end, making an X-shape under your chin.
Bring the thick end horizontally across the front of the thin end.
Continue looping the thick end around the thin end, passing it horizontally behind the back of the thin end from left to right.
Flip the thick end vertically up and over the front of the knot, then tuck it back down behind the knot.
Bring the thick end out and to the left of the thick end.
Bring the thick end across the front of the knot from left to right. This will form a horizontal band. Slip a finger through it.
Finally, bring the thick end up behind the knot and tuck it through the horizontal loop you made in Step 7.
Pull the thick end all the way through and tighten the knot by grasping it with one hand and pulling carefully on the thick end with the other.
9. Balthus Knot
fancy ways to tie a necktie - how to tie a Balthus knot
Learn how to tie a Balthus Knot:

Drape a LONG tie around your neck with the seam upward and the thick end on your left. The thick end should hang at least to mid-thigh and the thin end to the center of the chest.
Cross the thin end over the thick.
Bring the thick end up in front, tuck it down behind the thin end and cross behind it.
Bring the thick end back up in front and loop over the thin end, this time on the left side of the forming knot.
Tuck the thick end down and across, finishing with it behind the thin end and to its right.
Flip the thick end upward and loop it over the center of the knot.
Now bring the thick end down behind the knot, crossing from right to left.
Bring the thick end horizontally across the front of the knot, crossing from left to right.
Bring the thick end behind the knot and upward. Leave a little looseness in the horizontal pass you just made.
Tuck the thick end through this horizontal pass.
Adjust by tugging gently down on the thin end while snugging the knot in place with your other hand. Ideally, the tie beneath the knot should be quite wide but still fall to your beltline.
The Balthus knot is highly recommended for any fancy events – make sure you wear it to those fine dining dinners, theater and art events.

10. Hanover Knot
Learn how to tie a Hanover Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the seam exposed and the thick end on your left, hanging 4-5 inches lower than the desired finishing position.
Cross the thick end under the narrow end from left to right, creating an X.
Bring the thick end across the front of the narrow end from right to left. Hold on to the forming knot with one hand.
Tuck the thick end up through the loop around your collar.
Bring the thick end all the way down and tug it through. – but DON'T tuck it through the horizontal band you created in Step 4.
Bring the thick end around from right to left, crossing behind the knot.
Flip the thick end upward, passing diagonally in front of the center.
Feed the thick end down through the loop, and let it emerge from behind the knot – hanging toward your right.
Bring the thick end horizontally from right to left. This creates a second horizontal band. Slip a finger underneath this band.
Next, bring the thick end upward, passing once more from underneath the loop around your collar.
Bring the thick end down through the horizontal band and snug everything into place.
11. Plattsburgh Knot
how to tie a tie series
Learn how to tie a Plattsburgh Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the seam exposed and the thick end on your left, 4-5 inches lower than the desired finishing position.
Cross the thick end of the tie underneath the narrow end to form an X. Hold on to that X and flip the tip of the thick end upward over the front of the loop around your collar.
Tuck the thick end through the loop and bring it back toward your left side.
Point the thick end upward.
Bring the thick end back up in front of the loop – still staying to the left of the narrow end.
Tuck the thick end down through the loop, emerging on your right.
Bring the thick end horizontally across the front of the knot from right to left. Slip a finger under the horizontal band you just created.
Tuck the thick end up through the loop around your collar from behind.
Feed the thick end down through the horizontal band and snug it down firmly.
Tighten by holding the knot with one hand and pulling on the narrow end with the other. Adjust the edges so it looks symmetrical.
12. Grantchester Knot
how to tie a tie charts
Learn how to tie a Grantchester Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the seam outward and the thick end on your left, 4-5 inches lower than your desired finishing position.
Cross the thick end underneath the thin end, forming an X.
Wrap the thick end across the front of the thin end, going horizontally from right to left.
Then wrap the thick end from left to right behind the thin end.
Now wrap the thick end across the front from right to left. Use a finger to hold the horizontal band you’ve just made in place.
Slip the thick end of the tie under the loop around your collar.
Flip the thick end down and let it hang in front of the knot. Keep using your finger to hold the band in place.
Wrap the thick end behind the knot from right to left.
Wrap the thick end around the front of the knot from left to right and insert a finger under the horizontal band you've created.
Bring the thick end through the loop around your collar from underneath.
Feed the thick end down through the horizontal band, snug it down and tease the corners of the knot out into an even shape.
13. Victoria Knot
different neck-tie knots
Learn how to tie a Victoria Knot:

Drape the neck-tie around your collar with its seam inward and the thick end on your left, about 2-3 inches lower than your desired finishing position.
Cross the thick end of the tie horizontally in front of the narrow end and then behind it.
Pass the thick end across the front again from left to right.
Pass the thick end behind the knot from right to left.
Bring the thick end across the front a third time and slip a finger under the new horizontal band you’ve just created.
Insert the thick end through the loop around your collar, coming from underneath it.
Feed the thick end down through the horizontal band.
Snug the thick end into place. Adjust by holding onto the knot with one hand and pulling gently on the narrow end with the other hand.
14. Cafe Knot
cool ways to tie a tie
Learn how to tie a Cafe Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the seam facing inward and the thick end on your right, about a half an inch lower than you want the finished tie to hang.
Cross the thin end over the thick end, forming an X. Then bring the thin end up through the loop you just formed, behind the X.
Flip the thin end over the top of the knot.
Bring the thin end behind the knot from left to right.
Then bring the thin end across the front from right to left.
Now bring the thin end behind the knot and up through the loop around your neck. This will leave a horizontal band across the front of the knot.
Flip the thin end over the front of the knot so that it hangs down.
Bring the thin end slightly to the left of the thick end, then fold it around behind the knot, passing from left to right.
Bring the thin end up in front of the knot, pointing the tip upward and toward your left shoulder.
Tuck the thin end through the loop around your collar, behind the rest of the knot and emerging on the left side of the thick end.
Tug the thin end down firmly and take a moment to arrange the center of the knot. You want the diagonal legs to rise at the same angle, meeting squarely beneath your chin.
Flip the thick forward and up. You can toss it over one shoulder.
Turn the thin end point-upward and slip it through the single horizontal loop across the back of the knot.
Pull the thin end all the way through the loop and snug it up tight.
Flip the two ends of the tie back down.
Tighten carefully by holding the knot in one hand while tugging on the thick end with your other.
The Cafe Knot is a difficult one. Don't try it until you're very familiar with the basics of how to tie a tie.

15. Eldredge Knot
tie tying instructions
Learn how to tie an Eldredge Knot:

Drape the tie around your collar, with the thick end on the right exactly where you want it to hang when the knot is completed.
Pinch the wide end of the tie to form a dimple and cross the thin end in front of the thick end as horizontally as possible.
Wrap the thin end around behind the cross-shape, crossing horizontally from right to left.
Tuck the thin end through the loop around your collar.
Bring the thin end horizontally across the thick end.
Tuck the tip of the thin end up through the loop around your collar and flip it over the top of the knot, crossing diagonally downward from left to right. Pull it down snug to form a diagonal band along the right side of the knot.
Bring the thin end around behind the back of the knot and up through the diagonal band.
Feed through and pull tight to create a diagonal band on each side.
Aim the thin end of the tie straight upward, then tuck it down beneath the loop around your collar, emerging to the right of the knot.
Loop the thin end of the tie up and around the circle around your collar. Leave a little bit of slack in this step.
Tuck the tip of the thin end down and to the left, underneath the loop around your neck, and up through the loop you just created.
Flip the thin end over the top of the loop around your collar.
Tuck the remainder of the thin end out of sight, either behind the thick end or by sliding it horizontally under the loop around your neck. Tighten if needed by pulling the thick end and adjust each diagonal band to roughly the same width.
This is a very complex tie knot that says you REALLY know how to tie a tie… and you're not afraid to show it off.

16. Trinity Knot
step by step necktie tying instructions
Learn how to tie a Trinity Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the seam facing inward and the thick end hanging on your right where you want the finished length of the tie to be.
Cross the narrow end diagonally in front of the thick end, making an X, and tuck it up under the loop around your neck.
Bring the narrow end back over the top of the loop.
Pass the narrow end horizontally behind the thick end.
Flip the narrow end over the top of the loop around your collar.
Feed the tip of the narrow end down and out underneath the loop around your neck, on the far right side of the knot.
Bring the narrow end horizontally across the front of the knot from right to left. Slip a finger underneath the horizontal band this creates.
Bring the narrow end up underneath the loop around your collar and down through the horizontal band. Slide a finger underneath the narrow end just above the knot.
Pass the narrow end around behind the thick end from right to left.
Feed the tip of the narrow end up over the loop around your collar and through the small vertical loop you reserved in Step 8.
Pull the narrow end all the way through the vertical loop, still angling diagonally upward and to your right, and snug it down.
Pull all the slack out of the knot and adjust as necessary to make the three visible folds identical in size and angle. Hide the narrow end either behind the thick end or under the loop around your collar.
17. Christensen Knot
18 ways to tie a necktie
Learn how to tie a Christensen Knot:

Drape the necktie around your collar with the thick end on the left. This end should be hanging a good four to six inches lower than the finished length you desire.
Cross the thick end horizontally in front of the thin end from left to right.
Bring the thick end around behind the thin end horizontally from right to left.
Flip the thick end up in front of the loop around your collar.
Tuck the thick end down behind the loop around your collar, emerging on the right side of the thin end.
Bring the thick end in front across the earlier horizontal band and the diagonal you created in Step 5. Slip a finger under this new horizontal crossing.
Bring the thick end around behind the knot from left to right.
Bring the thick end across the front, right on top of the horizontal fold you made in Step 6. (Your finger should still be holding the fold open.) Keep both horizontal bands held slightly off the collar with a finger.
Bring the thick end up underneath the loop around your collar.
Tuck the thick end down behind both of the horizontal crossings and pull through.
Pull the knot into place by holding the knot with one hand. Now tug gently on the thin end with the other. Use your finger to tease out the diagonal folds until the X shape of the knot is very clear.