How to Tie a Bow Tie
HANDBOOK
FACEBOOK
PINTEREST
TWITTER
GOOGLE +
The bow tie is a tour de force in its own right. More of a style icon than accent, it has graced the likes of everyone from Winston Churchill to James Bond. It is a statement that shows you’re debonair, self-aware and not too timid to shy away from the crowd of Four-in-Hands and Half-Windsor tie knots. (Not that there’s anything wrong with them.)

However, as they say with great sartorial power comes great responsibility, and correctly tying and wearing a bow tie is no exception. A pre-tied or clip-on option is out of the question, and a loosely tied, too large or haphazardly askew look will destroy the whole effect.

Which is why learning how to properly tie a bow tie is not only an important life skill, but a rite of passage.

HOW TO TIE A BOW TIE
STEP 1
Step 1
Hang the bow tie flat around your neck, pulling side A longer than side B by approximately 1.5 inches.

STEP 2
Step 2
Bring A across B close to your neck to prevent the tie from becoming too loose.

STEP 3

Step 3
Continue to bring A up behind B, forming a simple and loose knot.

STEP 4

Step 4
Fold B to make a bow tie shape by pulling it to the left and then folding it back over itself to the right. The fold should be directly between the collar points.

STEP 5

Step 5
Drape A over the front of B.

STEP 6
Step 6
Fold A and pass it through the loop behind B.

STEP 7
Step 7
Continue pulling A through the loop, without pulling it completely through. This will form the back half of the bow.

STEP 8
Step 8
Tighten the knot and adjust until even by pulling on opposite sides simultaneously. Pull the front left and back right section to tighten, and the front right and back left end apart to loosen.

How To Tie A Bow Tie
Bow ties are great for formal occasions and black tie dress code, but also to show your personality during the workweek and on the weekend.
SHOP SELF BOW TIES

Watch this video to quickly get the hang of tying a self-tie bow tie.

Still Need Help?
When it comes to tying a bow tie, practice makes perfect. At first it might seem intimidating, but tying a bow tie is easy if you follow these steps.
To tie a bow tie, the first step is to make sure that one end of the bow tie is longer than the other end by a few inches. The longer end of the tie should be on your right side.
Step 01
To tie a bow tie, the first step is to make sure that one end of the bow tie is longer than the other end by a few inches. The longer end of the tie should be on your right side.

Cross the longer end of the bow tie over the shorter end. Bring the longer end of the bow tie underneath the shorter end, then bring it out from the center.
Step 02
Cross the longer end of the bow tie over the shorter end. Bring the longer end of the bow tie underneath the shorter end, then bring it out from the center.

Fold the shorter end of the bow tie horizontally.
Step 03
Fold the shorter end of the bow tie horizontally.

Place the longer end of the bow tie over the shorter end.
Step 04
Place the longer end of the bow tie over the shorter end.

Fold the longer end of the bow tie horizontally.
Step 05
Fold the longer end of the bow tie horizontally.

Insert the longer end of the bow tie through the loop at the back of the shorter end.
Step 06
Insert the longer end of the bow tie through the loop at the back of the shorter end.

Pull both ends gently to tighten the knot.
Step 07
Pull both ends gently to tighten the knot.

Adjust as needed - and don't worry, slight imperfections add character.
Step 08
Adjust as needed - and don't worry, slight imperfections add character.

Quick Links
HOW TO TIE A TIE

HOW TO FOLD A POCKET SQUARE

