Video: how to wash your hands
Watch this video to find out the best way to wash your hands.

Play Video
Media last reviewed: 30 March 2020
Media review due: 30 March 2023
You should wash your hands for the amount of time it takes to sing "Happy Birthday" twice (around 20 seconds):

image of turning tap on in sink
1. Wet your hands with water.
image of applying soap over the sink
2. Apply enough soap to cover your hands.
image of rubbing hands together over the sink
3. Rub your hands together.
image of cleaning between the fingers over the sink
4. Use 1 hand to rub the back of the other hand and clean in between the fingers. Do the same with the other hand.
image of cleaning between the fingers over the sink
5. Rub your hands together and clean in between your fingers.
image of cleaning palms of hands over the sink
6. Rub the back of your fingers against your palms.
image of cleaning right thumb over the sink
7. Rub your thumb using your other hand. Do the same with the other thumb.
image of cleaning left palm over the sink
8. Rub the tips of your fingers on the palm of your other hand. Do the same with other hand.
image of rinsing hands in the sink
9. Rinse your hands with water.
image of drying hands with a disposable towel
10. Dry your hands completely with a disposable towel.
image of turning off the tap using a disposable towel
11. Use the disposable towel to turn off the tap.
If you do not have immediate access to soap and water then use alcohol-based handrub if available.

When should you wash your hands?
You should wash your hands:

after using the toilet or changing a nappy
before and after handling raw foods like meat and vegetables
before eating or handling food
after blowing your nose, sneezing or coughing
before and after treating a cut or wound
after touching animals, including pets, their food and after cleaning their cages
Washing your hands properly removes dirt, viruses and bacteria to stop them spreading to other people and objects, which can spread illnesses such as food poisoning, flu or diarrhoea.

It can help stop people picking up infections and spreading them to others.

It can also help stop spreading infections when you're visiting someone in hospital or another healthcare setting.


7 Steps to Washing Your Hands Properly
Handwashing steps
Type of soap
When to wash hands
Dry skin prevention
Hand sanitizer
Bottom line
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)Trusted Source, proper hand hygiene is vital to lowering infectious disease transmission.

In fact, research has shown that handwashing lowers the rates of certain respiratory and gastrointestinal infections up to 23 and 48 percent, respectively.

According to the CDC, washing your hands frequently is particularly important to help prevent the spread of the new coronavirus known as SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease known as COVID-19.

In this article, we’ll look at the key steps to washing your hands correctly to ensure they’re free of germs that can cause serious infections.

How to wash your hands
Below is the seven-step handwashing technique endorsed by the CDC and World Health Organization (WHO):

The key to washing your hands is to make sure you thoroughly clean all surfaces and areas of your hands, fingers, and wrists.

Here are more detailed handwashing steps recommended from the WHOTrusted Source. Follow them after you’ve wet your hands with water and soap.

After you’ve completed these steps, you can rinse and dry your hands.

Does it matter what type of soap you use? 
Plain soap is just as good at disinfecting your hands as over-the-counter antibacterial soaps. In fact, research has found that antibacterial soaps aren’t any more effective at killing germs than regular, everyday soaps.

In 2017, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)Trusted Source banned the use of the antibacterial agents triclosan and triclocarban. The reasons cited by the FDA for the ban of these agents included:

antibacterial resistance
systemic absorption
endocrine (hormone) disruption
allergic reactions
overall ineffectiveness
So, if you happen to have older bottles of antibacterial soap stocked away, it’s best not to use them. Throw them out, and just use regular soap instead.

Also, there’s no evidence to suggest that the water temperature makes a difference. According to one studyTrusted Source, washing your hands in warm water doesn’t seem to get rid of more germs.

The bottom line is that it’s safe to use whatever water temperature is right for you, and use any regular liquid or bar soap you have on hand.

HEALTHLINE RESOURCE
Words matter: What is conscious language?
Make sure your words portray people the way they want you to see them. Our Conscious Language Guide explains terms like person-first language and identity-first language to help you get started.

When to wash your hands
Washing your hands is particularly important when you’re in situations where you’re more likely to acquire or transmit germs. This includes:

before, during, and after you prepare food
before and after you:
consume foods or drinks
are exposed to someone with an infectious illness
enter a hospital, doctor’s office, nursing home, or other healthcare setting
clean and treat a cut, burn, or wound
take medication, such as pills or eye drops
use public transportation, especially if you touch railings and other surfaces
touch your phone or other mobile device
go to the grocery store
after you:
cough, sneeze, or blow your nose
touch visibly dirty surfaces, or when there’s visible dirt on your hands
handle money or receipts
have touched a gas pump handle, ATM, elevator buttons, or pedestrian crossing buttons
shake hands with others
engage in sexual or intimate activity
have used the bathroom
change diapers or clean bodily waste off others
touch or handle garbage
touch animals, animal feed, or waste
touch fertilizer
handle pet food or treats
How to prevent dry or damaged skin
Dry, irritated, raw skin from frequent handwashing can raise the risk of infections. Damage to your skin can change the skin flora. This, in turn, can make it easier for germs to live on your hands.

To keep your skin healthy while maintaining good hand hygiene, skin experts suggest the following tips:

Avoid hot water, and use a moisturizing soap. Wash with cool or lukewarm water. Hot water isn’t more effective than warm water, and it tends to be more drying. Opt for liquid (instead of bar) soaps that have a creamy consistency and include humectant ingredients, such as glycerin.
Use skin moisturizers. Look for skin creams, ointments, and balms that help keep water from leaving your skin. These include moisturizers with ingredients that are:
occlusive, such as lanolin acid, caprylic/capric triglycerides, mineral oil, or squalene
humectants, such as lactate, glycerin, or honey
emollients, such as aloe vera, dimethicone, or isopropyl myristate
Use alcohol-based hand sanitizers that contain skin conditioners. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers with humectants help ease skin dryness, while emollients replace some of the water stripped by alcohol.
